# Wise Choices, Apt Feelings

### Morality and Rationality

To call something rational is to endorse it in some way. A wide variety of human attributes can be judged rational or irrational - a person can *act* (ir)rationally, *believe* (ir)rationally or even *feel* (ir)rationally in certain circumstances. Assuming we understand what judgments of rationality amount, what is the relationship between morality and rationality? One broad conception of morality imagines that morality just is rationality, one judges that something is rational if and only if they judge it to be moral. A more narrow conception of morality places moral judgments as a particular subset of judgments of rationality. There may be circumstances where it is rational for an agent to be immoral. This piece works to analyze morality under the narrow conception.

Moral judgments are to be understood in terms of judgments of *moral wrongness*, and judgments of moral wrongness are to be undertood in terms of *blameworthiness*. To say that an action is *blameworthy* is to say that someone would be to blame for performing that action; to say that someone is to blame for performing an action is to say that it would be rational for (1) that person to *feel guilty* for performing the action and (2) others to *resent him* for performing the action. Now, to say that an action is morally wrong is to say that it violates standards that we demand other agents use to rule out certain actions. These standards are such that an agent who violates those standards would be to blame if (1) the agent must have performed the action because he wasn't *motivated* to rule out the action (i.e. it wasn't an accident), and (2) there are no extenuating circumstances that render the agent not fully *responsible* (i.e. the agent isn't mentally deficient, the agent had other alternative possibilities that did not cause extreme misery). Thus, an agent performing an immoral action would not be blameworthy if the either the agent wasn't responsbile or the agent performed the action not because of any motivational deficiency.

### Norm-Expressivistic Analysis of Rationality

In rought terms, to think that something is rational is to *accept norms* that, on balance, permit it. A norm here is a possible norm expressible in the form of an imperative. Therefore, to decide what is really rational, we have to settle what norms to accept ourselves. Going back to moral analysis, it follows that to say that someone is blameworthy is to *accept norms* that prescribe guilt from the agent and resent from others. Moral wrongness can thus be given a analogous analysis using the constraints given above.

Accepting a norm is a kind of psychological state that we are far from understanding. Accepting a norm is a part of one motivational system called *normative motivation* which is prominent only in relatively intelligent and sentient creatures. This motivational system may conflict with another motivational system called the *animal control system* which is shared with animals. Within the normative motivational system, we can distinguish between *internalizing* a norm and *accepting a norm*: (1) *Internalizing* a norm consists in being in the "grip" of a norm, i.e. to internalize a norm is to have a motivational tendency of a particular kind to act in the manner prescribed by the norm. This ability is shared with other social animals. Internalizing a norm needn't involve explicit awareness of the norm or even an ability to formulate the norm when queried, but can nevertheless coordinate one's behavior and may be formulated by a sophisticated observer (think of unspoken cultural norms such as those concerning conversational distance). (2) *Accepting* a norm consists in a disposition to avow the norm in unconstrained normative discussion. Normative discussion consists in working out what we are to do or think or feel under real and hypothetical situations, which involves a responsiveness to demands of consistency.

# Objections