# Summary

### Introduction

This piece is concerned with the definition of good and bad, not with what things are good and what things are bad. It will be shown that goodness is the only simple concepts in ethics. While knowing the definition of goodness might not be necessary to form a particular correct moral judgment, it is necessary to establish the *reasons* underlying any particular moral judgment, and it is highly unlikely that one can develop a theory of *general* moral principles without knowing the meaning of goodness. In this context, the desired definition of goodness is not intended to be the substituting of one word for other words based on ordinary usage. While any appropriate definition of good must cohere with the sense in which it is ordinarily used, this is not the primary interest. The primary interest is in determining the nature of the *object* or *idea* that the word is generally used to stand for. In other words, he is concerned with the philosophical practice of *conceptual analysis*, which is distinct from the purely sociological practice of describing a word's usage.

### Irreducible Simple Concepts

No definition of goodness can be given. In other words, "propositions about the good are all of them synthetic and never analytic". Thus, no axiomatic moral assertion can be made (e.g. "pleasure is the only good") as if that were the very meaning of goodness. "Good" is a simple notion, like that of "yellow". One cannot explain what "yellow" or "good" is to someone who is not already familiar with the concepts. Of course, one can describe how a word is ordinarily used (e.g. "horse refers to a hoofed quadruped of the genus Equus"). However, this is not the important sense of definition. The important sense of definition is a description of the real nature of the object or idea denoted by the word (e.g. "a horse is a creature composed of certain objects - i.e. heart, liver, legs, etc. - in a certain relation)". This latter explanation is the sort of definition of interest here. However, this latter definition is possible only with complex objects or notion which are composed of irreducible objects or notions. This is impossible with simple notions such as "good" or "yellow".

Now, it may be possible to enumerate *the good*, i.e. all of the objects that *are* good, if, for example, it turns out that all things that are good also have property X. However, this is not the same as defining what goodness is. For example, we may describe yellow by appealing to a certain sort of light-vibration that is present in all things that are yellow. However, this cannot be what we *mean* by yellow; children and pre-scientific people were competent users of the concept "yellow" far before understanding the light-sensations. Thus, we may be able to say that certain vibrations necessarily corresponding to yellowness, but the light vibrations cannot be what we perceive when we perceive yellowness, nor can it be what we *mean* by yellowness. The same is true of "good". In the case of goodness, this is the naturalistic fallacy.

### The Naturalistic Fallacy and the Open Question Argument

When one philosopher asserts that "good *means* pleasure" and another asserts that "good *means* desired", there are two different things that they might mean. Firstly, they might be advancing opposing definitions. Thus, their disagremeent can be summarized by them both saying that pleasure is not identical to that which is desired. If the debate is over definitions, it is impossible to (dis)prove any particular definition as definitions are constructed phenomena, nor would any stipulated definitions have any ethical implications. Secondly, they might be saying that most people use "good" to refer to pleasurable or desired things. But this, again, has no ethical implications and is not informative. The point of ethics is to determine what people ought to do, but this goal cannot be accomplished by determining that such and such word is used by most people to express such and such ideas. *No linguistic analysis of a definition can ever provide a reason for someone to do anything.* Not only does it have no ethical implications, it is also not informative: when people say "pleasure is good", this cannot be equivalent to a meaningless analytic claim such as "pleasure is pleasure" or "good is good", as they seem to be saying a synthetic claim which is something more than that. They think people are mistaken and not just making a linguistic mistake. Indeed, the statement "pleasure is good" can be a meaningful and important synthetic claim only if "good" does not mean the same thing as "pleasure". 

If good does not define an irreducible simple property, then there are two alternatives: either (1) good denotes a complex notion or object, or (2) good denotes nothing at all and is meaningless. Consider (1). Consider the question "Is X good". Now, imagine that a proposed complex analysis of goodness states that "all questions of the form 'Is X good' are questions of the form 'Does X have property Y' (e.g. is X desired, is X pleasurable, etc.)". However, we can always further ask "Is it good that X has property Y" ('e.g. "Is it good to desire X", "Is it good that X is pleasurable", etc.). This further question is clearly intelligible. But, if X was a complex object that could be analyzed in terms of Y, then such a question would not be intelligible, i.e. the question *makes sense* and does not reveal any conceptual confusion. Thus, X is not such a complex object. Now consider (2). Consider again the question "Is X Good". Everyone actually understands the question as meaningful, and the state of mind expressed by the question is different from the state of mind expressed by "Is X pleasurable, desired approved, etc." Thus, there is an obvious awareness of the object goodness present in everyone's mind. Therefore, goodness cannot be meaningless. 

# Objections

### Begging the Question

(from Alexander Miller and SEP)

Frankena writes: "[T]he charge of committing the naturalistic fallacy can be made, if at all, only as a conclusion from the discussion and not as an instrument of deciding it." (1938: 465). In other words, it is merely *assumed* that all questions about the goodness of a naturalistic property are intelligible open questions that do not reveal conceptual confusion. But this is just begging the question. If analytic naturalism is correct, then there *is* conceptual confusion.

### Informative Conceptual Analysis

(from Alexander Miller and SEP)

Moore assumes that there can be no conceptual analysis of "good" because such a conceptual analysis would have to be uninformative and uninteresting, yet questions about "good" are always informative and interesting. However, there is a patently false premise in this reasoning. Conceptual analysis *can* sometimes be informative and interesting. (e.g. the dispositional analysis of colours invterms of our dispositions to see things in certain ways, the analysis of knowledge as justified true belief, and so on). In fact, conceptual analysis *must* be informative and interesting to explain the viability of many philosophical positions. This is possible because can one grasp a concept without being consciously aware of what is involved in the correct analysis of that concept. This can be explained by distinguishing between knowledge-how (the possession of an ability) and knowledge that (propositional knowledge), and then to argue that grasp of a concept
consists in the possession of knowledge how, whereas knowledge of a correct analysis is a species of knowledge that. One example of this is with grammar: someone can know how to speak grammatically without being able to state in propositional form the extremely complicated grammatical rules which underlie that ability. 

### Unconsidered possibilities

Moore seemed to assume that an ethical theory had only two options: analytic naturalism and non-naturalism. Needless to say, this is terribly inadequate. There is synthetic naturalism as well as non-cognitivism.

# Salvaging the Open Question Argument

#### Darwall, Gibbard and Railton

Sure, conceptual analysis in theory can be informative and interesting, but such analysis can be true only if they capture of all of the essential features of the concept analyzed. However, the analytic naturalistic understandings of moral concepts do indeed omit something central to them. Unfortunately, Moore never argued what that something is (which can perhaps be explained by his non-naturalism), but he might have said something like this: Attributions of goodness to P appear to have a conceptual link with the guidance of action towards promoting P (judgment internalism). For any naturalistic property R, we can imagine clear-headed beings who would fail to find appropriate reason or motive to action in the mere fact that R obtains regarding P. The fact that attributions of goodness are *necessarily* action-guiding whereas attributions of R are only *contingently* action-guiding suggests that goodness and R are not analytically equivalent. The naturalist can respond by rejecting judgment internalism or rejecting analytic naturalism in favor of synthetic naturalism (or maintaining that some naturalistic properites *are* intrinsically motivating, which seems strange). This argument should also be used against analytic non-natural reductionism and perhaps even some forms of synthetic naturalism that are focused on finding what referrents track or guide our *linguistic* use of moral terms.

### Reductionism vs Naturalism (from me)

G.E. Moore's argument is actually an argument against analytic reductionism (naturalistic or non-naturalistic) rather than naturalism itself. His open question argument defeats both analytic naturalistic reductionism and analytic non-naturalistic reductionism. For any non-natural property 'N' (e.g. God's divine command), it is always intelligible to ask "is 'N' good". Such a question does not reveal a conceptual or linguistic confusion. Conversely, his open question argument does *not* defeat irreducible naturalism. For, if good just is a natural property, then we *can* say that it is not intelligible to ask whether natural property 'N' really is good, where 'N' just is goodness. Therefore, neither analytically irreducible naturalism and analytically irreduible non-naturalism are vulnerable to the analytic open question argument, and both naturalistic analytic reductionism non-naturalistic analytic reductionism are defeated by this argument.

### Pumping up intuitions against analytic reductionism

Some people might accept the above arguments and still maintain that moral properties can be analytically reduced to non-moral properties. This could be due to simply not appreciating the force of the open question argument. No analytic reduction of goodness could ever account for substantive disagreement. The reason is because a merely linguistic disagreement can never account for a substantive genuine disagreement. Consider the following two possible accounts of analytic reductionism.

On one interpretation of "Good means N", someone is expressing their own personal definition of Good. But this cannot itself explain why they would disagree with someone else who advanced a different definition of Good. For example, imagine Alan advanced meanings of "Ork" and "Shaw" whereby Orks referred to bears and Shaws referred to deer, and Bob advanced the reverse meaning of those words. When Alan and Bob do a perfect survey of all the animals in the area, they might give different answers to the questions "How many Orks are in the area?" and "Are there more Orks than Shaws?", but this would be the result of a merely linguistic disagreement. There wouldn't be a substantive disagreement. That is, they would have the exact same view of the world, assuming they agree with all of the relevant physical facts. They're just using different terms to express their identical views. On the other hand, when people give different answers to the questions "Is abortion immoral?" or "Is homosexuality bad?", it seems like there *would* be a substantive disagreement. Even if people agree on all of the relevant physical facts in these circumstances, if they gave different answers to these questions, it seems they would have different views of the world. And these different views cannot be explained by merely semantic differences. 

On a different interpretation of "Good means N", when someone says this they are describing the societal meaning of the word. This analysis *could* explain how individuals could have substantive disagreements, since two people who gave different answers to goodness would have different views of the world (namely, views relating to what the rest of society beleived). But this analysis is wrong for two reasons. Firstly, that would make it a strictly incoherent contradiction to say "My society is incorrect in thinking that N is good/bad". But people are clearly not always incorrect, let alone contradictory, when they say this.

Secondly, this wouldn't be about to account for substantive disagreements across cultures. Definitions are purely relative. They are ascriptions of arbitrary utterances and symbols to particular concepts or objects in the world. They are appropriate only to the extent that they are supported by a particular linguistic community. Two groups can form separate linguistic communities with different definitions of moral terms, and we wouldn't say that one of the communities were *linguistically* incorrect or mistaken. For example, imagine another linguistic community that was linguistically identical to our own except that their moral terms were switched, i.e. 'good' in their society referred to what we refer to as 'bad' in our society, and so forth. Let's also say that they acted in ways that promoted what they considered to be 'good'. It seems like it is *intelligible* for us to say that they are mistaken in their behavior. But in this case, their mistake cannot be attributed to a linguistic mistake. Instead, their mistake must be attributed to a mistaken action. This reveals tha analytic reductionism ignores the conceptual link between moral judgments/facts and motivation/reason to act. The problem is that no *contingently* given linguistic structures can necessarily explain motivation/reason to action in the way that terms like 'good' seem to. Note that if this conceptual link was not present, it would not be intelligible to say that their society was mistaken (e.g. we don't think the French are mistaken just because they use the term 'grape' to refer to what we mean by 'raisin' and use 'raisin' to refer to what we mean by 'grape'). This argument should also be used against analytic non-natural reductionism and perhaps even some forms of synthetic naturalism that are focused on finding what referrents track or guide our *linguistic* use of moral terms.