# What is the Moral Problem

Consider the following two distinctive features of moral discourse:
1. The *practicality* of morality.
    - *Rationality* - judging that an act is morally right implies that one has reason to perform the act.
    - *Motivation* - judging that an act is morally right (because of the rationality of moral judgments) implies that one has some motivation to perform the act.
2. The *objectivity* of morality. 
    - *Correctness* - we suppose that moral judgments can be correct, which implies a domain of moral facts about which we can form (true or false) beliefs.
    - *Agent-Neutral* - no one is better placed to discover them than anyone else. The only relevant determinate for the rightness of an act is the *circumstances* that the action takes place, regardless of *who* finds themselves in those circumstances.
    - *Accessible* - by engaging in moral conversation and argument, we can discover objective moral facts.

According to the standard picture of psychology (from Hume), there are two kinds of psychological states - beliefs and desires. Beliefs represent how the world is, and thus can be evaluated based on the accuracy of their representations. Desires represent how the world is to be, and thus cannot be evaluated on the basis of any accuracy of the world. According to Hume, these states of mind are conceptually distinct. Thus, it is always possible to pull them apart modally; for any belief-desire pair, we can conceive of someone with one state of mind and not the other. Because of this, desires are not in themselves subject to rational assessments; they are merely arrational dispositions that we have. Action is thus the product of these two states: an action X requires that someone have a desire P be true and a belief that action X will make it the case that P becomes true.

These two features plus the Humean psychology creates the following three claims:

1. Moral judgments express a belief about an objective fact.
2. If A judges that it is morally right X then he is motivated to X
3. An agent is morivated to X only if he has some appropriate desire.

(1) suggests that moral judgments express beliefs. (2) and (3) suggest that moral judgments express desires. But, according to the standard Humean picture, beliefs and desires are distinct experiences, so this cannot be possible. This creates the Moral Problem, which is the organizing problem explaining much disagreement in metaethics. Different metaethical positions reject different claims in this dilemma. The expressivists deny (1), the externalists deny (2) and the non-Humeans deny (3).

This books argues that we can accept (1) and (2) and much of the spirit of (3). The major sub-plot of the book concerns how much of the Humean theory of motivation can be rejected or accepted. The argument turns on a distinction between kinds of reasons: normative and motivating. We should accept Hume's claim that beliefs and desires are distinct experience that are essential to explaining the motivating reasons behind every human action. But we should reject his claims that desires are beyond rational criticism. This will be based on an anti-Humean theory of normative reasons.

# The Expressivist Challenge

### Alleged Dilemma of Descriptivism

Expressivism denies (1) that moral judgments express beliefs, and (2) that moral judgments are capable of truth. Rather, moral judgments express a speaker's (dispositions to have) attitudes of approval and disapproval, which are incapable of being true or false. We will consider Ayer's argument for expressivism, which comes from considering the only two forms of descriptivism - naturalism and non-naturalism.

Naturalism defines ethical terms in the form of non-ethical terms, e.g. utilitarian theories define goodness in terms of pleasure, happiness, satisfaction, etc; subjectivist theories define goodness in terms of the approval of certain individuals or societies. However, such analysis cannot be correct because for any naturalistic property 'N', it is never *self-contradictory* to say that N is sometimes not good. But this is impossible if there were such a naturalistic property 'N' that 'good' could be defined in terms of. Thus, there is no such naturalistic property 'N' to define 'good', which means naturalism is false.

Non-naturalism maintains that ethical concepts are irreducible to empirical concepts. Such a theory must maintain that ethical concepts are controlled by an "intellectual intuitionism". But such a theory cannot be emprically verifiable. Clearly, certain things may seem intuitive to some people but not to others, and there is no verifiable method to choose whose intuitions to trust. Since non-naturalism mantains that ethical propositions are genuine synthetic propositions which are not empirically verifiable, non-naturalism must be false (since, according to Ayer, all meaningful synthetic propositions are empirically verifiable).

### Non-Naturalism

Ayer's objection to non-naturalism is problematic because it depends on the merits of a controverisal theory of meaning - logical positivism. But there are other problems with non-naturalism that Ayer never mentioned. Ayer's general criticism against non-naturalism was its barren epistemology, and this can be revealed independent of logical positivism, as Simon Blackburn pointed did. 

If we are to enrich our ontology with special entities (i.e. moral facts), we need to have some method of accessing such facts, but non-naturalism seems to have no adequate answer (independent of logical positivism). The only epistemic method for learning of moral facts seems to be some sort of intuitive faculty analogous to *causal perceptual awareness* (independent moral facts *cause* perceptions that product moral judgments). The problem is this cannot explain a plattitude of moral reasoning: the *supervenience* of the moral on the natural. Everyone agrees that the moral properties of an entity *supervenes* on that entity's natural properties. Moreover, everyone agrees that this is an *a priori* truth. Recognition of the supervience of the moral on the non-moral is a constraint on the proper use of moral concepts.

Intuition is incompatible with supervenience because it cannot explain how merely *perceiving* that a certain entity with natural properties N and moral properties M can explain the *a priori* truth that all entities with natural properties N also have moral properties M. One possible explanation might be to say that after witnessing the coinstantiation of N and M and one circumstance, we generalize to other cases. But this faces two problems. 

1. It doesn't explain why it's an *a priori* truth. Just because one has perceived properties N and M together in one circumstances does not *guarantee* that properties N and M are *always* coinstantiated. Instead, this would be an inductive argument yielding a *contingent* and *a posteriori* truth. 
2. Moral reasoning very often involves *imagined* or *described* situations, not *perceived* situations. We form moral judgments about these imagine situations via general standards. But how can we *perceive* the applicability of general standards? How can we *perceive* the timelessness and universality of these general standards? And how can they be guaranteed a priori? It seems that a causal perceptual explanation of moral judgments cannot explain the cases where we form judgments about an imagined situation that could not have *caused* any of our judgments.

### Metaphysical (Synthetic) Naturalism

One response to Ayer denies that naturalism is a metaphysical thesis rather than a definitional thesis. It is a claim about property identities, not a claim about definitional identities. Thus, it could be possible that moral property M and natural property N are identical, whereby this would be a non-analytic (synthetic), *a posteriori*, necessary identity.

A similar strategy can be done by identifying color properties with certain surface reflectance properties. This identity need not be definitional, and can be handled in the way we handle proper names. For example, we could say that the word "red" refers to the surface reflectance property of objects that is causally responsible for our usage of the word red. This would be identifying the *property* redness with some surface reflectance property, but it would not be to identifying the *concepts* of redness with any surface reflectance property (surely, our *concepts* of redness was prior to any concepts of surface reflectance properties regarding light wavelengths). The general strategy to give a property identity of X is to posit a reference fixing description of X, which allows us to learn *a posteriori* which property that picks out that description and therefore X.

This strategy fails for moral terms because naturalists would have to choose a description to fix the reference of moral terms. However, they must do so in a way that moral terms do not have different content in different contexts. But this is impossible if, for example, moral terms are used to refer to the naturalistic feature of properties that are causally responsible for our usage of those moral terms. It's possible that two persons' (or two societies') uses of moral terms are caused by different naturalistic properties. In that case, when these two persons or societies use moral terms different (say, to criticize each other), then they wouldn't even be disagreeing (i.e. their assertions would not be incompatible), because their terms would have different referents. This is promotes a radical relativism, which is inconsistent with the *objectivity* of morality.

### Conceptual Analysis

Ayer's argument against definitional naturalism was the Open Question Argument: (1) for natural property N it is coherent to entertain the possibility to N is or is not identical to any normative property M, (2) if it is coherent to entertain the possibility that N and M are not identical, then N and M are not conceptually identical, (3) therefore there is no natural property which is conceptually identical to any normative property M. The problem with this argument is the 2nd premise (2). It is a common fact about analyses that concept X may constitute a correct analysis of concept Y despite it being possible to coherently entertain whether something that fits the criteria of X also fits the criteria of Y (or vice versa). This is known as the Parodox of Analysis (that a conceptual analysis can be analytic while also unobvious informative) and is common to all of philosophy. Consider some possibilities: (i) the concept of being red and the concept of having properties that cause the appearance of redness, (ii) the concept of knowledge and the concept of justified true belief, (iii) the concept of intentional actions and the concept of actions motivated by desire.

Ayer and Moore misunderstood the purpose of conceptual analysis. An analysis of a concept is successful if it encapsulates all and only plattitudes which are necessary to come to have mastery of that concept. This is not to say that if someone is a master of the concept that they will be aware of these plattitudes off the top of their head. Rather, these plattitudes must capture the inferential and judgmental dispositions of those who do in fact have mastery of the concept. Such an analysis should provide the means to learn everything there is to know *a priori* about the concept. This can explain the Parodox of Analysis. Even though someone who has mastery of a concept must *have* certain inferential and judgment dispositions, it may not be transparent what those inferential and judgmental dispositions *are*. Thus, one need not know what the best systematization of the plattitudes that describe those dispositions is. Whereas mastery of a concept requires knowledge*-how*, mastery of an analysis requires knowledge-*that*. A similar phenomenon can be found with grammatical norms (e.g. order of adjectives), or even implicit societal norms that regulate behavior (e.g. conversational distance).

Some plattitudes of the color red include "the redness of objects cause us to see them as red", "red is more similar to orange than to green", "prototypical examples are needed to teach redness", etc. These would be a summary-style analysis of "red" instead of a straightforward dictionary-style definition.

The plattitudes about the concept of 'rightness', descriptions of the inferences and judgments that a mster of the concept is disposed to make, include the following: (1) *practicality*: if A judges X-ing to be right, then A has some motivation to X (assuming they are rational), (2) *objectivity*: if A judges X-ing to be right and B judges X-ing to not be right, then at least one of them are incorrect, (3) *supervenience*: acts with the same non-moral features have the same moral features, (4) *substance*: right acts are concerned with human flourishing, are expressive of equal concern and respect, etc. and (5) *procedure*: moral arguments have a coherentist form (i.e. reflective equilibrium); when two parties have different moral judgments, they tend to try to resolve the disagreement by appeal to more general moral principles that they can agree to.

### Reductive Definitional (Analytic) Naturalism

The naturalistic analysis pondered by Ayer do fail because they miss some key plattitudes of moral terms. Subjective definitional naturalism can capture moral supervenience and the practicality of morality, but not the objectivity. Non-subjective definitional naturalism can capture moral supervenience and the objectivity of morality, but not the practicality. But there can be other possibilities for a reductive definitional analysis.

A non-reductive dispositional analysis is just one kind of definitional naturalistic analysis. Another analysis could be a network analysis. A network analysis of moral terms is a reductive, explicit (i.e. non-summary style) analysis that simply says that moral properties are the natural properties that are related to each other in the ways that moral plattitudes purport (if such natural properties do exist). It doesn't follow that there are any moral properties, for there may not be any natural properties that meet the plattitudes demanded by morality.

Network analyses about a realm of concepts can face a permutation in that they risk being unable to explain the uniqueness of certain properties. For example, on a network analysis of colors, color properties would be reduced to natural properties that stand in relation to each other in a manner appropriate for the plattitudes of colors (i.e. red objects are just those that appear red, oranage those that appear to be orange, etc.). The problem is that there may be a property that stands in set of relations isomorphic to the set of relations that red stands in to, but this property could equally well be isomorphic to orange, or green, etc. And so it wouldn't be able to distinguish *which* properties were which color. There are no *a priori* plattitudes that can fix exactly which physical properties ground which color properties (plattitudes like "red is the color of blood" is not an *a priori* plattitude.

The problem with network analyses regarding colors is that we learn many of our colors *a posteriori* via paradigmatic examples of physical properties that exhibit certain colors. These are not any *a priori* plattitudes central to our color concepts. This is why network analyses concerning colors. But the same issue arises for moral terms. Our moral terms are highly interconnected and dependent on each other. We learn of rightness and wrongness, good and bad procedures, etc. by reference to *a posteriori* paradigmatic examples of things with those features. This cannot be met by a reductive, explicit network analysis.

The only solution to avoid the expressivist challenge is to provide a non-reductive, summary-style naturalistic analysis of moral concepts. This shall be given later.

# The Externalist Challenge

Consider two forms of internalism:
1. Practicality of moral judgment: if A judges that it is right to do X, then either A has some motivation to do X, or A is practically irrational (e.g. absent weakness of will, depression, etc.).
2. Rationalism: it is right for A to do X only if there is a reason for A to do X.

Rationalism is a stronger thesis than the practicality requirement, for anyone who accepts rationalism must also accept the practicality of moral judgment, but the reverse need not hold. Rationalism entails practicality because of the following plattitudes about the nature of reasons: an agent has reason to X only if that agent would be motivated to do X insofar as he is rational; as a consequence, an agent who judges themself to have reason to do X would be motivated to do X insofar as he is rational. Similarly, as a consequence of rationalism, judging that an action is right entails a judgment that one has reason to perform the action. Therefore, if rationalism is true, then to judge that an action is right entails judging that one has reason to perform the action, which entails that one would be motivated to perform the action insofar as one is rational.

On the other hand, one can accept the practicality of moral judgment while denying rationalism. For example, if moral judgments are just expressions of preference or desire, then they would be motivating to the extent that preferences and desires are. But these preferences or desires need not be requirements of reason, so rationalism doesn't follow.

Opponents to the practicality of morality (from Brink) and rationalism (from Foot) shall be considered in turn.

### Practicality Requirement

David Brink argues that we can conceive of an Amoralist, someone who recognizes the existence of moral considerations and remoains unmoved to follow the duties prescribed. The defender of the practicality of rationality must deny that such a person is conceivable, that such an idea is incoherent. However, it certainly seems conceivable, according to Brink, because such an amoralist can use moral terms to pick out the exact same properties that we do, which means their use of moral terms would be guided by the moral terms in the same way that our uses. Defenders can accept that an amoralist can reliably apply moral terms, but they affirm that the amoralist doesn't actually regard a duty as a moral demand; rather the duties are regarded as the demands of conventional morality, i.e. they use moral terms using "Inverted" Commas" around the terms. According to David Brink, this is a poor response: we *can* imagine that someone genuinely accepts a duty as being moral without being moved.

The "Inverted Commas" reply is on the right track but mistaken: it is not that amoralists are making a kind of judgment different than that of moral judgments (i.e. judgments about societal uses of moral terms); rather, they are sincerely trying to make a moral judgment, but they *fail*. This problem can be brought out by analogy of considering someone who is (color-)blind from birth, but who has a reliable method of using color terms. We can imagine that she has technological assistance to determine the surface reflectance properties of any object with ease. Such a person could use colors with the same extension as everyone else, and her uses could be determine by the same entities that determine our uses, and her judgments needn't be equivalent to expressing the color judgments of other people. However, some argue that such a person wouldn't really have master of color terms; for it is constitutive of possessing color concepts and mastering color concepts that one have the appropriate visual experiences under suitable conditions, which means they would be failing to make color judgments. A similar argument can be made for the use of moral terms by alleged amoralists. The question, then, is whether the appropriate extension and causal explanation of one's use of a term implies that they possess mastery the concepts in question, or whether a further physiological phenomenon may be necessary (e.g. visual experiences, motivation, etc.).

The account of mastery that requires the further physiological phenomenon should be preferred because it alone can provide an explanation of the reliable connection between moral judgment and motivation in the good and strong-willed person. To illustrate this connection, imagine someone who enters a debate about which political party to support states that they ought to vote for party X beacuse it promotes values ABC and for that reason they will vote for X. But then they are convinced that party Y actually promotes values ABC far better. We can reliably expect that this person (in normal circumstances) will have a newfound motivation to vote for party Y assuming they are sincerely convinced. It seems that this reliable connection cannot be explained by the externalist. The externalist will have to explain the connection because the agent is contingently a good and strong-willed person. It is one's contingent motivation to do that which is right combined with the belief that X is right which explains why one is motivated to do X, not the *mere* belief that X is right. The problem with this is that it characterizes a good person as not one who has non-derivative motivation to promote justice, equality, well-being, etc. but rather as someone who has non-derivative motivation to do what is right and (because of a belief that justice, equality, well-being, etc. are right) derivative motivation to do what is right. This doesn't seem to capture the motivations of common people or who we would consider good people; it treats moral virtue as a kind of moral fetish.

### Rationality Requirement

Philippa Foot rejects Kant's claim that moral facts are facts about reasons for action and instead argues for an anti-rational institutional account of moral facts. Foot concedes that moral requirements purport to be categorical imperatives rather than hypothetical imperatives, i.e. the considerations that determine whether an agent has a moral duty depends soley on the agent's *circustances* rather than his *desires* or *interests*. However, she notes that this is also the case with ettiquette, i.e. the rules of ettiquette that apply to a person depend only on that person's *circumstances* not their desires or interests. For example, if someone says that their desires would be satisfied by replying to a letter in the first person that was written in the third, it doesn't follow that they did not violate a norm of ettiquette, or that they "shouldn't" (from the perspective of ettiquette) have acted as they did. So both ettiquette and morality issue categorical imperatives as opposed to the hypothetical imperatives issued by prudential rationality. However, this is not enough to suggest that the "shoulds" from ettiquette are requirements of reasons, so it also cannot be enough to suggest that the "shoulds" from morality are requirements of reason. Therefore, there needs to be a different argument to show that morality provides requirements of rationality. But this seems implausible because the traditional view of practical rationality links reasons for action with an agent's ends or goals, making practical rationality a system of hypothetical imperatives. Thus, moral facts should be seen, as with ettiquette, as institutional facts.

One objection to an institutional account of moral facts is that it cannot account for the practicality of moral judgments, which was already shown to be true. An agent who recognizes the demands prescribed by a system of institutional duties need not necessarily have any corresponding motivation to act in accordance with those demands, without revealing any practical rationality. One's motivation for acting in accord with the demands of ettiquette or the law is purely contingent; to the extent that such a motivation exists, it is a derivative motivation that is based on either a non-derivative motivation to obey the law or ettiquette or some other non-derivative motivation that would be promoted by following the law/ettiquette. Such an institutional analysis may be able to account for law or ettiquette, but it cannot capture the practicality of morality without reducing moral virtue to a kind of moral fetish (see above).

Another objection to Foot's conception of moral facts as institutional facts is an argument against her assumption that practical rationality is a system of hypothetical imperatives, i.e. that one has a reason for action insofar as it promotes some end that he presently holds. This argument will be given later. Assuming that this argument succeeds and that requirements of practical rationality are *categorical* rather than hypothetical, then an argument to explain why the categorical requirements of morality connect to the categorical requirements of rationality. The argument can be given as follows: (1) moral requirements apply to rational agents as such; (2) we expect (in the sense of predict) rational agents to act as they are morally required; therefore (3) being rational, as such, must suffice to ground our expectation (prediction) that rational agents behave morally; (4) the only thing that we can expect (predict) rational agents as such to do is that they behave as they are rationally required; therefore, (5) we must think of moral requirements as categorical requirements of reason or rationality.

The controversial premise is premise (2) that we expect rational agents to do what they are morally required to do. It is already shown that we agents will be motivated to do what they judge to be moral, so it can follow that that we expect rational agents to do what they judge themselves morally required to do. This is not suffice to show that we expect rational agents to do what they are morally required to do, for different rational agents might form different judgments about their moral requirements without being irrational. But this is not possible given the plattitude of objectivity surrounding moral judgments (i.e. that all rational agents will converge to the same moral judgments insofar as they are rationa). Thus, the practicality of moral judgments combined with the objectivity of moral judgments justifies premise (2) that we expect rational agents to do what they are morally required to do.

Another argument can be given for premise (2). The appropriateness of a range of moral attitudes requires premise (2) to be true and, therefore, also the the rationalist conceptual claim. We approve and disapprove of what people do when moral matters are at stake. But such attitudes presuppose an expectation that rational agents act rightly. Note that approval and disapproval differ remarkedly from liking and disliking something. There are no restrictions on liking or disliking something, but it seems that approval or disapproval require that the object of the (dis)approval take into account the attitude of the (dis)approver in forming their decisions, e.g. it makes sense for me to (dis)like your consumption of strawberry ice-cream with no restriction, but it only makes sense for me to (dis)approve of your consumption only if I'm evaluating your behavior against a standard which there is a legitimate expectation that you will consider. Therefore, approval and disapproval only exist when there are grounds for legitimate expectations for someone else's behavior. Because we (dis)approve of rational agents insofar as they behave (im)morally, we have legitimate expectations that rational agents behave morally. What grounds these legitimate expectations must be that we conceive of moral requirements as requirements of rationality.

# Humean Theory of Motivation

# Anti-Humean Theory of Normative Reasons

# Solution to the Moral Problem