---
layout: post
author: JayMoss
---
## Pro-life argument

1. A fetus is a life
    - A. Arbitrariness argument
        1. The line drawn to designate when life begins must be non-arbitrary.
        2. The only non-arbitrary, non-repugnant line to draw for life before birth is conception.
        3. [from 1 & 2] Life begins at conception.
    - B. Potentiality argument
        1. If X has the potential to develop into a being of type T, then X should be afforded all the same rights afforded to beings of type T.
        2. Fetuses have potential develop into human life.
        3. [from 1 & 2] Fetuses have a right to life.
2. It is wrong to terminate a life
3. Abortion is wrong.

## Rebuttal

Rebuttal against 3:
- The pro-life argument works only if the fetus is understood as being a full life deserving of full rights to personhood. But if a fetus deserves full rights to personhood, then there are following two hugely unintuitive conclusions:
    - Abortion would be unjustified even when the pregnancy is due to rape: One cannot accept (1) a fetus deserves full rights to personhood, and (2) abortion is justified in the case of rape. Because (1) implies the falsity of (2). In other circumstances, when a person has full rights to personhood, another person cannot revoke those rights just because they were victimized. E.g. I cannot kill you to account for a crime that someone else committed.
    - Abortion would be unjustified even when the mother's life is at risk: One cannot accept (1) a fetus deserves full rights to personhood, and (2) abortion is justified when the mother's life is at risk. Because (1) implies the falsity of (2). In other circumstances, when a person has full rights to personhood, another person cannot revoke those rights just to save their life. E.g. I cannot kill you because I need a heart transplant.
- There are two options: 
    1. Bite the bullet and assert that abortion is unjutsified in the case of rape and danger to the mother.
    2. Admit that fetus don't really have full rights to personhood, but rather some weird form of pseudo-right to personhood. But what is the nature of the pseudo-rights and why should we believe that it encompasses protection of life only when the mother consented to pregnancy and/or is in danger. These are strange forms of rights not seen anywhere else. The only forms of rights either involve full rights to personhood (i.e. humans) or rights to not be subjected to pain but no rights to life (i.e. animals).

Rebuttal against 1A1:
- General cases: we can say the same about plenty of things - age when one should be able to consent, vote, work, smoke, drink, run for office, etc. Why the discrepancy?
- Abortion-specific case: assuming they believe that the mother can abort if her life is in danger. What non-arbitrary percentage of danger can you point to to say that the mother is justified in abortion? 

Rebuttal against 1B1:
- We don't think chlidren should have the right to vote, run for office, drive vehicles, consent to sex, etc. even though they have the *potential* to develop the capacities that would ordinarily generate these rights.
- Furthermore, what is meant by "potential"? Some children don't have the potential to develop these capacities. For example, let's say that we know the child will die before adulthood because of a genetic disorder.

Rebuttal against 2:
- Counter-examples: 
    - Killing in self-defense. (2) is modified to: it is wrong to terminate an innocent life. 
    - Killing with consent. (2) is modified to: it is wrong to terminate an innocent life without consent.
    - Killing to put someone out of misery who can't consent. (2) is modified to: it is wrong to terminate an innocent life without indication of consent or misery.
    - Killing someone who would have died at that moment: (2) is modified to: it is wrong to terminate an innocent life without indication of consent, misery, or probable future death.
- Blood transfusion case: people should not be forced to donate blood to others.
    - They respond by invoking responsibility. But, even if someone has put someone else's life in danger through their own voluntary actions, we don't force them to donate blood. Why the discrepancy?
    - They bite the bullet and say that we should force people to donate blood in these circumstances. Okay, but the impact of the responsibility is different. In the case of abortion, no being has their life deprived whereas in the case of the voluntary danger, someone's life has been deprived. The initial voluntary action X produces a responsibility to Y only if X without Y deprives the person of a life that they would have otherwise had.
    - They bite the bullet and say that we should be forced to donate blood to people when we put them in circumstances where they need blood, even if they would not have been alive anyway.
- Philosophical first principles: liberty

(1) There is no morally relevant difference between detaching in the Modified Blood Transfusion Hypothetical and and detaching in pregnancy.
(2) If there is no morally relevant difference between action X and Y, then X and Y must be given the same moral evaluation.
(3) It is morally permissible to detach in the Modified Blood Transfusion Hypothetical.
(4) (from 1 & 2) Detaching in the Modified Blood Transfusion Hypothetical must be given the same moral evaluation as detaching in pregnancy.
(5) (from 3 & 4) Detaching in pregnancy is morally permissible.


Notes:
- The deprivation argument has no independent force. It is not meant to show that you are permitted to harm anyone you bring into existence. That's absurd. E.g. giving a fetus FAS is also immoral.
- It has force only in a very narrow context if other principles are adopted. I.e. it removes the relevance of responsibility caused by voluntary behavior, specifically when the produced state of affairs is the creation of a new life.
- It is meant to show a conditional claim: IF it is permissible for the woman to abort due to rape THEN responsibility does not compel her to abort due to consensual sex. More generally: IF A is permitted to not sustain D because of bodily autonomy when they are not responsible for D's dependence THEN A is also permitted to not sustain D because of bodily autonomy when they ARE responsible for D's dependence if D would have never existed had A never performed the initial action that provided the responsibility.
- This does not allow the woman to give the fetus FAS because it is not permissible to give the fetus FAS even in the cases of rape. It does not allow parents to kill children because it is not permissible to kill children even in cases of rape. It might even allow that mothers can be compelled to raise and care for children assuming that we think mothers can be compelled to raise and care for children due to rape (perhaps we do?). 
- Do not try to justify the deprivation point by saying conception + death is no worse off than never conceiving, therefore abortion is permissible. This could justify all sorts of bad stuff. I.e. birth + premature murder is no worse off than never being born, therefore premature murder to one's offspring is permissible. The principle does not have wide scope. It's scope only shows that responsibility does not cancel bodily autonomy if it is responsibility for one's existence.

Objections:
- Mentioned in Boonin's paper - Langer, Tooley, etc.
- Future like ours objection
- "The Impairment Principle" argument:
    - If impairing an organism to the nth degree is immoral, then (all things else equal) impairing the organism to the nth+1 degree is also immoral.
    - Giving an infant FAS is immoral. Killing an infant causes more impairment than giving an infant FAS. Therefore, killing an infant is immoral.
    - Response: Giving an infant FAS in the case of rape is immoral. However, aborting an infant in the case of rape is not immoral. 
- Imagine a program is created which requests some stranger to donate their kidney to save someone. If you sign up, you have to stay signed up. This makes sense. Even though your intiial signing up did not deprive the victim of a previous state, it did deprive them of a life that they would have otherwise had (because otherwise someone else could have signed up).