From SEP: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/libertarianism/

Full ownership of an entity consists of a full set of the following ownership rights:
1. control rights over the use of the entity: both a liberty-right to use it and a claim-right that others not use it, 
2. rights to compensation if someone uses the entity without one's permission,
3. enforcement rights (e.g., rights of prior restraint if someone is about to violate these rights), 
4. rights to transfer these rights to others (by sale, rental, gift, or loan), and
5. immunities to the non-consensual loss of these rights. 
	
At the core of full self-ownership, then, is full control self-ownership, the full right to control the use of one's person. Libertarianism is committed to a strong version of the self-ownership thesis. Self-owners thus have moral powers to appropriate external objects, such as natural resources. A distinction can be made, however, between right-libertarianism and left-libertarianism, depending on the stance taken on how natural resources can be owned. 

- One objection to full self-ownership is that it (like rights in general) can lead to inefficient outcomes. Where there are externalities or public goods (such as police protection), each person may be better off if some of each person's rights are infringed (e.g., if each person is required to provide service each week on a police patrol). Given the problems generated by prisoners' dilemmas and other kinds of market failure, in large societies it will typically be impossible to obtain everyone's consent to perform such services. Given the importance of such services, it is arguably permissible to force individuals to provide certain services (in violation of full self-ownership) as long as everyone benefits appropriately.

A plausible account of liberty rights and powers of appropriation over natural resources must be unilateralist in the sense that initially natural resources are not protected by a property rule (which requires consent for permissible use or appropriation). This requires, under a broad range of conditions:
1. agents are initially permitted to use natural resources without anyone's consent, and 
2. agents initially have the power to appropriate (acquire rights over) natural resources without anyone's consent.

According to a unilateralist conception of the power to appropriate, agents who first claim rights over a natural resource acquire those rights—perhaps provided that certain other conditions are met. These additional conditions may include some kind of an interaction constraint (such as that the agent “mixed her labor” with the resource or that she was the first to discover the resource) and some kind of “fair share” constraint. In what follows, for simplicity, we shall ignore the interaction constraint and focus on the fair share constraint. Conceptions move from right to left depending on the limits imposed by the "fair share" constraint.

Lockean libertarianism allows unilateral use and appropriation but insists on restrictions at both the stage of appropriation - in the form of the Lockean proviso that “enough and as good” be left for others - and subsequent possessions - because no one can exclude the needy from one's property. Lockean libertarianism views natural resources as initially unprotected by any property rule (no consent is needed for use or appropriation) but as protected by an ongoing compensation liability rule. Those who use natural resources, or claim rights over them, owe compensation to others for any wrongful costs imposed.

joint-ownership left-libertarianism (not lockean; not unilateralist): maximally strong version of a constraint on original appropriation. 
	
- A radical version holds that initially no one has any liberty right to use, or any moral power to appropriate, natural resources; individuals may use natural resources only with the collective consent (e.g., majority or unanimous) of the members of society.
	
- A less radical version holds that agents may use natural resources, but holds that they have no moral power to appropriate natural resources without the collective consent of the members of society (e.g., Grunebaum 1987). This leaves agents with  little security in their plans of action. They have the security that others are not permitted to use their person (e.g., assault them) without their consent, but they have only limited security in their possessions of external things (except with the consent of others). 

equal opportunity left-libertarianism (lockean, unilaterist): interprets the Lockean proviso as requiring that one leave enough for others to have an opportunity for well-being that is at least as good as the opportunity for well-being that one obtained in using or appropriating natural resources. 
	
- Individuals who leave less than this are required to pay the full competitive value of their excess share to those deprived of their fair share. Unlike the equal share view, those whose initial internal endowments provide less favorable effective opportunities for well-being are entitled to larger shares of natural resources. 
	
- Although this version of libertarianism is highly egalitarian, it limits the egalitarianism to the distribution of the value of the natural resources. Full self-ownership still places constraints on the promotion of equality: individuals are not morally required to provide personal services or body parts merely because they have more valuable personal endowments. This is what makes it libertarian.

Equal share left-libertarianism (lockean, unilaterist): interprets the Lockean proviso as requiring that one leave an equally valuable share of natural resources for others. 
	
- Individuals are morally free to use or appropriate natural resources, but those who use or appropriate more than their per capita share owe others compensation for their excess share.

Sufficientarian (centrist) libertarianism (lockean, unilaterist): interprets the Lockean proviso as requiring that others be left an adequate share of natural resources (on some conception of adequacy). 
	
- There are different criteria that can be invoked for adequacy, but the most plausible ones are based on the quality of one's life prospects: enough for life prospects worth living, enough for basic subsistence life prospects, or enough for “minimally decent” life prospects. 
	
- Depending on the nature of the world and the conception of adequacy, the sufficientarian proviso may be more, or less, demanding than the Nozickean proviso. If natural resources are sufficiently abundant relative to the individuals, then the Nozickean proviso will be more demanding (since many individuals would get more than an adequate share without the use or appropriation), but if natural resources are sufficiently scarce, then the sufficientarian proviso will be more demanding than the Nozickean one.

Nozickean right-libertarianism (lockean, unilaterist): interprets the Lockean proviso as requiring that no individual be made worse off by the use or appropriation of a natural resource, compared with non-use or non-appropriation. 

- One might object that this sets the compensation payment too low. It bases compensation on each person's reservation price, which is the lowest payment that would leave the individual indifferent with non-use or non-appropriation. Use or appropriation of natural resources typically brings significant benefits even after providing such compensation. There is little reason, one might argue, to hold that those who first use or claim rights over a natural resource should reap all the excess benefits that those resources provide.

Radical right libertarianism (not lockean; unilateralist): holds that that there are no fair share constraints on use or appropriation. 
	
- Agents may appropriate, use, or even destroy whatever natural resources they want (as long as they violate no one's self-ownership). On this view, natural resources are initially not merely unprotected by a property rule (i.e., permissible use does not require anyone else's permission); they are also unprotected by a compensation liability rule (i.e., no compensation is owed if one uses). 
	
- One objection points out that appropriation without restrictions makes it possible that one person could own the entire world, thereby effectively putting the remaining propertyless persons in the problematic condition of requiring the owner's permission to do anything. Nor is there any reason to think the individuals are morally permitted to ruin natural resources as they please. Some sort of fair share condition restricts use and appropriation.
	
--------------------

My theory does not prioritize self-ownership in the sense that people should necessarily have full control over their bodies (and therefore property) as indicated above. Rather, I prioritize the values/interests of individuals. I believe that an individual's values/interests cannot be significantly suppressed/limited in promotion of someone else's values/interests. Note that supressing/limiting values/interests is not the same as controlling one's body. There may be instances where controlling one's body does not significantly suppress/limit their values/interests, or even where controlling one's body actually promotes their values/interests. This means that, under special circumstances, others can control A's body against A's will, but only it is in the promotion of A's interests or values. 

I'm not sure what these "special circumstances" consist in, but one trivial example where such force can be exerted is this: when A is intoxicated or when is uninformed. Perhaps the circumstance is this: whenever A's values/interests commits himself to be controlled by others in a certain situation. The reason this allows for force is because people can be wrong about their values/interests and therefore force (rather than, say, reason) may be the only way to promote their values/interests.

Nevertheless, equal-share libertarianism is probably a close approximation of my own view. If I were to try to modify this conception to be in agreement with my view, it would have the following caveats: 
1. rather than compensation being required whenever one uses/appropriates more than their per capita share, compensation is required when an initial agent uses/appropriates so much that others actually attempt to, but are prevented from, attaining an equal share as the initial agent. It is necessary but not sufficient that others be unable to use/appropriate an equal share. It must also be shown that such individuals actually attempted to get such a share. If they never tried to use/appropriate such a share to begin with, then they are owed nothing, since their interests/values were never limited in promotion of someone else's.
2. some sort of communal property is possible. People can join together and form communities where they own all the property within that community amongst themselves (which includes SOME control over the bodies of the individuals living there). Within these communities, the extent to which people can then enforce more positive, substantive laws, is based on the extent to which: (a) people are free to exit the community, (b) there is sufficient equal valuable resources outside of the community, and (c) the impact of these laws has significant effects on the lives of others. Note that this communal property probably isn't justified on any self-ownership principle; rather, it's justified because such property may be necessary for promotion of certain peoples' values/interests. In fact, there are levels to the extent that property is communal vs. private:
	- Truly private property functions as mentioned earlier, with all the rights of full ownership of an entity.
	- The larger the scope of a region that's communally owned, the more communal it is and the less private it is. Communal properties that are mostly private (e.g. small neighborhoods) can enforce larger constraints on behavior than larger communal properties that are mostly communal (e.g. cities). The reason smaller communities are afforded by restrictions is because conditions (a), (b) and (c) are more likely to be met. Smaller, more restricting communities, may be required to pay into a federal fund that that acts to sustain areas of the land where only libertarian laws are enforced, so that (a) and (b) are truly satisfied. Insofar as one cannot escape such a community (or if all available property is used up), compensation is obligatory for individuals (in the form of safety net, welfare, redistribution, etc.). 
	- Rather than thinking of (a) private property and (b) communal property in this binary fashion, it may be more useful to think of all property on a scale that goes from private to communal. The more private the property is, the stronger the full ownership rights will be. The more communal the property is, the weaker the rights will be. Note that nothing is fully private, not even a person's body (since I have shown that one's body may sometimes be controlled by others if it promotes the agent's values/interests). The extent to which property is private versus communal (i.e. the nature/strength of the ownership rights of that property) depends on the extent to which ownership of said property influences the values/interests of others. The more impactful ownership of certain property is to certain people (e.g. the only lake in the country), the more communal that property ought to be, among those people. The less impactful ownership of that property is to certain people (e.g. one of many empty plots of land in the city), the more property that property ought to be. Handling use of communal property should be done via a mechanism that best promotes the values/interests of the subjects involved, giving more weight to individuals influence more by the property.

