## Something cannot come from nothing

#### Argument

1. Something cannot have come from nothing
2. Therefore, the universe came from something
3. Therefore, the universe must have come from God.

#### Rebuttal

(1) would be an unsupported assumption. There's nothing *logically* impossible about something coming from nothing, i.e. there is no logical contradiction. So, presumably, you mean that it's *physically* impossible for something to come from nothing, i.e. our universe just so happens to abide by certain physical laws that prevent this from happening. But why assume that *this* is true? You might point to the fact that we have never *observed* something coming from nothing. The problem with this is that our observations of the universe are limited both *temporally* and *spatially*. This means we don't know if the *observed patterns* of the universe are actually *omnipresent laws* of the universe. The patterns that we notice in the temporally and spatially observable portion of the universe need not be laws that apply at *all* times and in places of the universe.

But let's assume that something cannot come from nothing. That would mean something had to exist eternally. However, it still doesn't follow that the universe must have formed from an external being. You say that the universe cannot itself be eternal because of (a) thermodynamics and (b) causality. According to you, (a) and (b) impose certain laws that prevent the universe from being eternal. These would presumably be *physical* laws and not *logical* laws (otherwise, I could also say it's logically impossible for this "external being" to be eternal). Your evidence for this is presumably *observation*. But, again, our observations are limited temporally and spatially, so the patterns we notice in the observable portions of the universe need not actually be omnipresent laws.

A final problem with your position is there doesn't seem to be a coherent distinction between the "universe" and this external thing. The universe, by definition, is everything that exists. If this external being ever existed, then it was, by definition, a part of the universe and not external. So, if we keep this "external" component of your argument, then your argument is this: the universe must have been caused by something that didn't exist. That would be incoherent, so that's probably not what you mean. But if we drop the "external" component of your argument, then your argument becomes this: the universe must have been caused by a being that does not follow the current patterns of the observable universe (e.g. something cannot come from nothing, laws of entropy, laws of thermodynamics, etc.). In that case, your argument *would* be coherent and probably correct: the physical laws governing the origins of our universe must have differed from the patterns that we observe now. Thus, there's no reason to keep the "external" component, as that would make your position not only unsupported, but also incoherent. 