I will be assuming determinism is true. So whether we have free will depends on whether compatibilism is true. My post here will argue for determinism. The first thing to settle when having these debates is meaning. We need to determine what we *mean* by "free will". *What beliefs are we expressing when we say someone has free will?* After settling meaning, then we can determine whether people sometimes actually have free will or not. Obviously, if "free will" is *defined* as some sort of incompatibilist free will, then incompatibilism is true; no argument needed. But it's equally true that if "free will" is *defined* as compatibilist free will, then compatibilism is true; no argument needed. Neither of these definitions illuminate the compatibilism/incompatibilism debate. 

I would say that there are two principles components behind the *meaning* of free will, i.e. someone has free will if and only if these two components are met: (1) to say that someone had free will in performing an action is to say that they "could have done otherwise" in performing that action, and (2) to say that someone had free will in performing an action is to say that they could be morally responsible for performing that action. This isn't exactly a definition per se, but I believe it serves as a useful enough analysis to help illuminate the meaning of an otherwise unclear concept; the hope is that the meaning behind *these* two components is more clear and less controversial than the meaning behind "free will". Now that the meaning of "free will" is somewhat illuminated, we can discuss whether people *actually* have free will. We have to answer the following two questions: (1) Is it true that people could have done otherwise in a determined world? (2) Do people have moral responsibility in a determined world? People will have free will in performing a particular action whenever the answers to both of these questions are "yes".

Now, to answer the first question: **Is it true that people could have done otherwise in a determined world?** The answer to this question depends on the meaning of "could have done otherwise". I believe the only reasonable understanding of "could have done otherwise" is this: to say that someone *could* have done otherwise is to say that they *would* done otherwise *if they had different intentions*. For example, if a student misses class because he woke up late, then he might say "I *could* have made it to class". We can make sense of this statement in a determined world because what he means is "I *would* have made it to class *if I intended to wake up earlier*". On the other hand, if he misses class because he had an unexpected heart attack, then he might say "I could *not* have made it to class". Here, we can make sense of this statement because what he means is "I *would not* have made it to class, *regardless* of my intentions" (presumably, their heart attack would have occurred regardless of their intentions). It should be clear that this reasonable understanding of "could have done otherwise" is a compatibilist analysis: on this analysis, some people "could have" done other than they actually did, even in a determined world (as the above examples show).

Incompatibilists try to claim that "could have done otherwise" deals with what a person would have done *if all the conditions were the same* (including everyone's intentions). But this is pretty much cheating - no one uses "could have done otherwise" in this manner. Under this analysis of "could have done otherwise", we cannot make sense of the examples mentioned earlier. Under this analysis, if the student who woke up late says "I could have made it to class", the incompatibilist would have to respond to the student with "Actually, no, you could not have made it to class, because that would require that you do other than what you *actually* did. But, you see, the world has been determined from the Big Bang such that you *had* to sleep late". No competent English speaker would respond to the incompatibilist with "Oh, I hadn't considered that. I was mistaken. I guess I couldn't have made it to class". Rather, any competent English speaker would conclude that the incompatibilist simply *misunderstood the language* used by the late student; they *misunderstood the meaning* of "could have done otherwise". Let's do away with the flawed incompatibilist analysis of "could have done otherwise" and return to the more reasonable compatibilist analysis given above. Again, on the more reasonable interpretation, some people "could have done otherwise" even in a determined world.

For the second question: **Do people have moral responsibility in a determined world?** First, again, we must settle what it means to say that someone is morally responsible for an action. To say that someone is morally responsible for an action is to say that they can be morally blamed/praised for that action. And moral blameworthiness/praiseworthiness is just one particular form of *evaluation* - it's an evaluation of one's moral character. Now, you probably don't think that evaluation *generally* is impossible in a deterministic world. For example, we can evaluate the quality of a certain car based on the car's attributes (e.g. fuel efficiency, safety, etc.), despite the fact that the car obviously did not *cause* those attributes. It seems then that we can clearly perform evaluations of moral character *specifically* in a determined world, just as we can perform evaluations *generally*. We simply point to the relevant attributes of their moral character - i.e. their intentions. So to say that someone is morally responsible for an action is to say that that action was somehow the result of the agent's intentions. Of course, this is perfectly coherent in a determined world.

This actually matches up nicely with the compatibilist understanding of "could have done otherwise" given above. On this analysis, if someone "could have done otherwise" when performing an action, then they must have performed the action because of their intentions. And, as stated earlier, someone is morally responsible for an action if that action was the result of their intentions. Thus, it follows that if a person "could have done otherwise" in performing an action, then they can be morally responsible for their action. So the analysis of moral responsibility converges nicely with the analysis of "could have done otherwise". For example, the student who wakes up late can be morally responsible for missing class, because he missed class *as a result of his intentions*. On the other hand, he would not be morally responsible for missing class due to a heart attack, because he did not miss class as a result of his intentions. Again, this is all possible in a determined world. So people can be morally responsible in a determined world.

This focus on intentions allows for a very convenient analysis of "free will" where someone had free will in doing X if and only if they performed X *because of their will* (i.e. where I'm using "will" as a substitute for "intentions"). For example, the student (probably) did not have free will in missing class due to the heart attack, because the heart attack was (probably) independent of his will (his intentions). On the other hand, he (probably) did have free will in missing class due to waking up late, because he (probably) would have woke up earlier if his will (his intentions) were different. 

In conclusion, because a person can be morally responsible in a determined world, and people "could have done otherwise" in a determined world, it follows that people can have free will in a determined world. So you should accept a compatibilist conception of free will. Assuming you agree that the world is determined in the relevant respects, you should also accept that we have free will.

Add three components:

1. Intuitions: the appeal of incompatibilism - it starts with an intuition that if people could not have done otherwise, then they don't have free will (show examples). To best meet these intuitions, they say that free will means "could have done otherwise if all conditions were the same." The appeal of this definition is that it *best captures our intuitions about usage.* But there's no reason to believe the latter qualifier is necessary. Indeed, metaphysical reversal rewinding of time with all variables fixed is not something that the ordinary person thinks about. If we modify the qualifier, then we have a different definition that *best captures our intuitions about the usage*. 
2. Even if that was not true, to incompatibilists that we have maintain moral responsibility & agency (and possibly morality, goodness, etc.), yet who think that I'm giving a new definition (rather than a theory) of free will: their argument would have to be something like: (P1) most people believe that free will requires indeterminism (not true but let's assume it's true); (P2) if most people believe that X is a feature of concept Y, then if your theory posits that X is not a feature of concept Y, then your theory must be a redefinition of Y (not true but let's assume that it's true); therefore, your theory, because it posits that free will does not require indeterminism, is a redefinition of free will. But this argument proves too much. If P2 is true, then I could say that you have redefined moral responsibility & agency, as most people have believed it to require libertarianism. They might object that, while this is true, even more people believe that something other than libertarianism is more tightly associated with moral responsibility & agency: that it warrants praiseworthiness/blameworthiness. But I could also say that praiseworthiness/blameworthiness is tightly associated with free will (as I have above). It's important to keep tight the association between moral responsibility/agency and free will. It makes no sense to say that one is compatible with determinism (against common intuitions), while also saying that the other is incompatible with determinism (agreeing with common intuitions). If you're going to be revisionist, then be consistently revisionist.
3. Terminological: (1) Already mentioned earlier somewhat. "Free" will literally means our will is free, i.e. unconstrained in the proper manner. This is compatible with determinism. When we think of other normative concepts with "free" in the phrase: freedom, free speech, we don't think that determinism is detrimental to this. For example, if I were to say "The slaves were free", does anyone honestly doubt this on the grounds of determinism? No, so why assume this is the case with free will. If I were to say "Free speech is good", would anyone rebut with "But free will is impossible, because of determinism"? No, so why do so with free will? They would have to show that "Free will" is special in that we think of metaphysical determinism when thinking of free will, but this is false. Only philosophers think of free will (see 1). 