# Reductionist Objections

### Against Analytic Reductionism

*Open Question Argument*. (1) Any proposed analytic reduction of a term must be uninformative and obvious. (2) Any analytic reduction of goodness would be informative and nonobvious. (3) Therefore, there can be no analytic reduction of moral terms. Consider the question "Is X good". Now, imagine that a proposed complex analysis of goodness states that all questions of the form 'Is X good' are questions of the form 'Does X have naturalistic property Y' (e.g. is X desired, is X pleasurable, etc.). The problem with this is that, we can always further ask "Is it good that X has property Y" ('e.g. "Is it good to desire X", "Is it good that X is pleasurable", etc.). This further question is clearly intelligible and coherent. But, if goodness that could be analyzed in terms of Y, then such a question would not be intelligible. For example, because triangle just means "three sided polygon", the question "do triangles have three sides?" would not be coherent and would reveal a conceptual confusion. Someone who asked that question would not be a competent user of the concepts involved. On the other hand, the question "is it good that X has naturalistic property Y" could be asked by a competent user of the concepts involved, without revealing any conceptual confusion. 

*Lack of disagreement*: (1) The meaning of our normative terms are determined by our contingent societal/personal circumstances. (2) Societies/persons can have moral disagreements that are not purely semantic. (3) Therefore, normative terms cannot be analytically reduced to non-moral terms based on societal/personal definitions. Definitions are social constructions. They are ascriptions of arbitrary utterances and symbols to particular concepts or objects in the world. They are appropriate only to the extent that they are supported by a particular linguistic community. Two groups can form separate linguistic communities with different definitions of moral terms, and we wouldn't say that one of the communities were *linguistically* incorrect or mistaken. For example, imagine another linguistic community that was linguistically identical to our own except that their moral terms were switched, i.e. 'good' in their society referred to what we refer to as 'bad' in our society, and so forth. Let's also say that they acted in ways that promoted what they considered to be 'good'. It seems like it is *intelligible* for us to say that they are mistaken in their behavior. But in this case, their mistake cannot be attributed to a linguistic mistake, e.g. we don't think the French are mistaken just because they use the term 'grape' to refer to what we mean by 'raisin' and use 'raisin' to refer to what we mean by 'grape'. The reason we can still disagree is not because of a semantic dispute, but because of a normative or motivational dispute (see below), which is excluded from this analysis. 

*Lack of Normativity/Motivation*: (1) No analytic reduction can provide someone with reason/motivation for action. (2) All predications of moral terms purport to provide others with reason/motivation for action. (3) Therefore, there can be no predication of moral terms expressed in the form of an analytic reduction. When someone asserts "goodness *means* X", they might be advancing their own personal definitions or society's definitions. But this has no ethical implications. The point of ethics is to determine what people ought to do, but this goal cannot be accomplished by determining that such and such word is used by most people to express such and such ideas. *No linguistic analysis of a definition can ever provide a reason for someone to do anything, nor motivate anyone to do anything.* When people say "pleasure is good", this cannot be equivalent to a meaningless analytic claim such as "pleasure is pleasure" or "good is good", as they seem to be saying a synthetic claim which is something more than that. They think people are mistaken and not just making a linguistic mistake. Indeed, the statement "pleasure is good" can be a meaningful and important synthetic claim only if "good" does not mean the same thing as "pleasure". 

*Insistence on normative language*. If normative term N really meant natural term M, then why not carry on making claims about M? If the thesis were true, this would be equivalent to making claims about N, so there should be no difference. The fact that one chooses not to do so implies either (1) he believes that there really is something about N not captured in M, or (2) he believes that society believes that there is something about N not captured in M. Either way, either he or society believes that N and M are not analytically equivalent.

*Translation Argument*. Imagine we wanted to translate another culture's language to our own. When translating our normative terms, we would be skeptical to attribute to them any normative terms if those terms did not usually accompany the corresponding motivation. This argument should also be used against analytic non-natural reductionism and perhaps even some forms of synthetic naturalism that are focused on finding what referrents track or guide our *linguistic* use of moral terms.

Response: deny that all analytic reductions must be trivial and uninformative.

##### Objectivist Reductionism

*Lack of Normativity/Motivation Argument*. Attributions of goodness to P appear to have a conceptual link with the guidance of action towards promoting P (judgment internalism). For any naturalistic property R, we can imagine clear-headed beings who would fail to find appropriate reason or motive to action in the mere fact that R obtains regarding P. The fact that attributions of goodness are *necessarily* action-guiding whereas attributions of R are only *contingently* action-guiding suggests that goodness and R are not analytically equivalent. The naturalist can respond by rejecting judgment internalism or rejecting analytic naturalism in favor of synthetic naturalism (or maintaining that some naturalistic properites *are* intrinsically motivating, which seems strange). This argument should also be used against analytic non-natural reductionism and perhaps even some forms of synthetic naturalism.

##### Subjectivist Reductionism

*Disagreement Argument*. Assume two people do agree that the meaning of moral terms reduces to some subjective account, e.g. "X is good" means "I approve of X" or "I desire X". When these two people disagree about whether X is good, they aren't even disagreeing. One is saying "I desire X" and the other is saying "I desire X". But these are not incompatible claims.

### Against Synthetic Reductionism

*A Priori Argument*. It seems we can come to learn about normative truths a priori. This is inexplicable if there is an a posteriori synthetic relationship between normative facts and non-normative facts. I.e. we cannot learn a priori that yellow is such and such wavelength, or that water is H2O. Yet how can it be the case that we can learn a priori that, e.g. some natural property *necessarily* co-instantiates a normative property? 

*Lack of Disagreement*. Synthetic identities can be found in other domains because we can easily fix the referrents of terms like "water" or "yellow", and then we can find that property that is always instantiated with that referrent. One strategy for doing this is to present a dispositional analysis: an entity is "yellow" just in case it causes sensation that we normally perceive as "yellow". Such a dispositional analysis is not promising for moral terms. Imagine that two societies are lingustically identical except when one society used the word "good" they referred to pleasure and the other society referred to God's will. On this reading, the two cultures wouldn't even disagree with each other, since the content of "good" in these two societies are different - they are using the same word to track different phenomenon. But it seems that these cultures can coherently disagree with each other, especailly if they each act in accordance with what is good.


