# Settling Terms

### Objectivity

Here is the Google definition of "objective": (of a person or their judgment) not influenced by personal feelings or opinions in considering and representing facts. Textbook definitions for philosophical terms are often inadequate. This is a clear example of an inadequate definition. It clearly gets some cases correct. So, for example, if I were to say "Jerry Seinfield is a funny comedian", this clearly depends on personal feelings or opinions and so this is a subjective claim. There can be no truth to this claim apart from a particular subject's feelings or opinions. However, this definition also clearly designate some things as subjective which are clearly objective. Here are some examples of the ways in which this definition is inadequate:

- It marks as subjective facts that can be indirectly *influenced* by human feelings or opinions. For example, "Humans harm the environment" would be marked as a subjective phenomenon since it is the result of human feelings and opinions. This is bad because the relevant *causal* relationship between our mental activity and the truth of the claim is not appropriate. In this case, the causal relationship is not direct.
- It marks as subjective facts that are *about* human feelings or opinions. For example, if I were to say "Jerry Seinfield is considered to be the funniest comedian in the country by most Americans", then presumably that's an objective sociological fact that we can independently verify with studies. However, the truth of this statement depends solely upon human feelings or opinions. So here we have a case where 

So it's not enough that a subjective claim be influenced by or be about human mental activity. A subjective claim must be a mind-dependent claim, i.e. a claim that is constituted by human mental activity. It has to be a proposition P such that P is true if and only if certain minds believe P to be true. An objective claim would be a mind-independent claim, i.e. a claim that is not constituted by human activity. It has to be a proposition P such that P is true independent of whether any minds believe P to be true. Subjective truths are constructions from a society or person. Objective facts can be discovered by people. Therefore, a litmus test for whether a proposition P is objective or not is whether it is possible for all minds to be wrong about P. If this is possible, then P must be objective (empirical facts, mathematical facts, etc.). Otherwise, P must be subjective (evaluations about humor, taste, art, etc.). 

### Morality as Rationality

Morality is difficult to define, but we can point to certain features of morality that are obvious. One, it is an evaluative or normative domain rather than a descriptive domain. That is, it's about evaluating certain actions, behaviors, motivations, etc. rather than describing them. It's a particular type of normative claim in that it makes claims about what we *ought* to do. People who make moral judgments purport to make judgments about what we *ought* to do and what we have *reason* to do. For example, someone might express a moral imperative by saying "the fact that she insulted you is not a *reason* to physically assault her." Given that it purports to explain what reasons we have, we can say that moral claims are intended to be claims about *rationality*. It should be noted that not all normative expressions formulated with an "ought" or "reason" are moral claims. For example, someone might say that "you ought to lift heavy objects with your legs, rather than with your back", this would be a rational claim based on self-interest (not morality). It would be a claim to the effect of "assuming you value the health of your back, you should do this...". This would not be a moral claim, fundamentally. 

The question of what distinguishes moral claims from general normative claims is a complicated question about metaethics. It's a descriptive claim that depends on linguistics, sociology, psychology, etc.

# Objective Rationality

### Reasons for belief

Beliefs can be rational or irrational. To say that a belief is rational for a particular agent is to say that their observations, perceptions, intuitions, etc. support holding that belief. For example, you might think that *seeing* a tree outside is a *reason* for *believing* that there is a tree outside. Of course, what it takes for these considerations to actually become reasons is quite complex, e.g. the fact that you *perceive* that the earth is stationary is no overriding reason to believe that the earth is stationary, given other perceptions and observations that suggest otherwise. If a person's beliefs do not adequately respond to reasons, then it seems fair to say that they are being *irrational*, i.e. their beliefs are not responding to the their perceptions, observations, experiences, etc. as they *ought* to. These are some normative ideas here. Insofar as there are reasonable/unreasonable, good/bad, right/wrong, etc. ways to form beliefs in response to perceptions, experiences, etc., there are normative constraints on beliefs. 

I presume that you think there is some objectivity with regard to reasons for belief, i.e. given certain perceptions, experiences, etc. there are *objectively* rational and irrational ways for one's beliefs to respond. For example, whether or not we have reason to believe that Climate Change is the result of human activity, whether or not we have reason to believe in God, whether certain superstitions are reasonable, etc. are presumably objective matters. Note that these are normative claims (not their descriptive equivalents). People do not get to decide whether or not belief in God really is rational or whether it really does follow from the evidence. Going back to our litmus test, it's possible for everyone to be wrong about their beliefs that they have reason to believe in God. Whether or not God is supported by the evidence is an objective matter.

Even further, we can say that there are particular substantive beliefs that are rational for everyone. For example, I believe that *everyone* has reason to utilize inductive reasoning (in assuming that the future will resemble the past, that unobserved cases resemble observed cases, uniformity of nature, etc). Note, however, that these reasons are foundational, axiomatic, normative assumptions to establish reasons for belief. These features cannot be deductively proven (it's possible for our universe to not exhibit those features), nor can they be confirmed by observation (the predictive validity of observations must assume induction is valid, so begs the question). Note that without inductive reasoning, we wouldn't be able to make essentially any substantive claims, especially any empirical claims. We would only have a raw perceptions and deductive reasoning, but that doesn't get us very far. We need foundational, axiomatic, normative assumptions to establish reasons for belief. Similar considerations apply to certain metaphysical beliefs as well (that there is an external world, that our memories are reliable, that our sensory inputs are reliable, etc.), though we should believe these because of convenience reasons rather than purely rational reasons.

### Reasons for feelings

Feelings can be rational or irrational. To say that a certain emotion or feeling is rational is to say that that emotion or feeling is appropriate in the given circumstances. For example, you might think that the fact that something is *dangerous* is, in itself, a reason to *fear* it, e.g. it is *rational* to be afraid of someone who is known to be violent. On the other hand, the fact that something is *different* is not, in itself, a reason to *fear* it, i.e. it is *irrational* to be afraid of someone just because they are of a certain religion, sexual orientation, etc. given that you know that they are not dangerous. As another example, it is rational to feel pride for having accomplished a challenging goal, e.g. it is rational to feel pride for finishing a marathon race. On the other hand, it is irrational to feel pride for something that isn't related to you in any way and did not involve accomplishing a goal whatsover, e.g. it is irrational to feel pride that the sun is out. There seems to be an inextrible relationship between fear and danger and between pride and accomplishment, such that the relevant feelings are appropriate if and only if the associated circumstances are present. These emotions and feelings seem to be responses to objects in a way that they purport to describe their object in a certain way. A similar example can be said of anger, e.g. it might be rational to be angry at someone for breaking your car window, but it is irrational to be angry at someone for informing you of this.

### Reasons for action

Actions can be rational or irrational. To say that an action is rational for a particular agent is to say that their own interests (present/future goals, values, desires, etc.) support performing that action. For example, you might think that *valuing* physical health is a *reason* to exercise frequently. Of course, what it takes for these considerations to become reasons is quite complex, e.g. the fact that you are addicted to coccaine and really *desire* the drug (despite the fact that you don't support that desire or that drug harms your interests in some way) is not a *reason* to take the drug, even if that desire was your strongest desire. If a person's actions do not adequately respond to their reasons, then it seems fair to say that they are being *irrational*, i.e. their actions are not responding to their interests as they ought to. These are also normative ideas here. Insofar as there are reasonable/unreasonable, good/bad, etc. ways to act, there are normative constraints on actions. 

I presume you think that there is objectivity with regard to reasons for action, i.e. given certain interests there are *objectively* rational and irrational ways for one to act. Going back to the litmus test, people can be *wrong* about their interests and what they think, believe, or feel in a particular moment. This can most easily be seen in the case of individuals where their rational faculties are impaired, i.e. children, the disabled and the intoxicated. People that fall into these categories might desire doing certain actions and they might be convinced that those are the rational actions for them to take. But they would be incorrect. Children are wrong if they think it's in their best interest to eat lead. An intoxicated girl is wrong if she think it's in her best interest to get in a strange guy's car after being drugged. These examples can be most easily seen in the cases where their rational capacities are severely impaired, but less extreme cases can be found in all humans. Since no humans have perfect rational faculty, we can find similar cases where they are wrong about what is rational for them. Thus, what people have reason to do is an objective matter. 

# Moral Analysis

### Against Analytic Reductionism

Back to the question of what distinguishes moral judgments from other normative judgments. This is a complicated metaethics question that concerns analyzing the definitional features of morality. Note that this cannot be answered by just looking at the fundamental principles behind a moral theory. For example, we cannot say that a consequentialist defines moral rightness as the promotion of pleasure and that the deontologist defines moral rightness as treating humanity as an end in itself. If that were the case, if this were just a disagreement about definitions, then this really wouldn't be a substantive disagreement with any normative implication. They mean to talk about what we are to do, and this cannot be answered by simply proposing definitions. For example, on this reading, if we had two English societies that were identical except that one defined 'goodness' as 'consequentialist goodness' and promoted consequentialism as we promote what we think is good, and another defined 'goodness' as 'deontological goodness' and promoted deontology as we promote what we think is good, then there would be no room for disagreement, when it seems like there is one.

Attributions of goodness to P appear to have a conceptual link with the guidance of action towards promoting P (judgment internalism). For any naturalistic property R, we can imagine clear-headed beings who would fail to find appropriate reason or motive to action in the mere fact that R obtains regarding P. The fact that attributions of goodness are necessarily action-guiding whereas attributions of R are only contingently action-guiding suggests that goodness and R are not analytically equivalent. The naturalist can respond by rejecting judgment internalism or rejecting analytic naturalism in favor of synthetic naturalism (or maintaining that some naturalistic properites are intrinsically motivating, which seems strange). This argument should also be used against analytic non-natural reductionism and perhaps even some forms of synthetic naturalism that are focused on finding what referrents track or guide our linguistic use of moral terms.

Some people might accept the above arguments and still maintain that moral properties can be analytically reduced to non-moral properties. This could be due to simply not appreciating the force of the open question argument. To better appreciate the problems with analytic reductionism, consider the following scenario: definitions are purely relative. They are ascriptions of arbitrary utterances and symbols to particular concepts or objects in the world. They are appropriate only to the extent that they are supported by a particular linguistic community. Two groups can form separate linguistic communities with different definitions of moral terms, and we wouldn't say that one of the communities were linguistically incorrect or mistaken. For example, imagine another linguistic community that was identical to our own except they had different definitions of their moral terms, i.e. 'good' in their society referred to deontological value (whereas ours referred to consequentialist value), and so forth. Also imagined that their actions, attitudes promoted what they thought of as 'goodness' and sanctioned what they thought was 'bad' just like we do. It seems like it is intelligible for us to say that they are mistaken in their behavior. But in this case, their mistake cannot be attributed to a linguistic mistake. Instead, their mistake must be attributed to a mistaken action. This reveals tha analytic reductionism ignores the conceptual link between moral judgments/facts and motivation/reason to act. The problem is that no contingently given linguistic structures can necessarily explain motivation/reason to action in the way that terms like 'good' seem to. Note that if this conceptual link was not present, it would not be intelligible to say that their society was mistaken (e.g. we don't think the French are mistaken just because they use the term 'grape' to refer to what we mean by 'raisin' and use 'raisin' to refer to what we mean by 'grape'). This argument should also be used against analytic non-natural reductionism and perhaps even some forms of synthetic naturalism that are focused on finding what referrents track or guide our linguistic use of moral terms.

### Moral emotions

I think the best understanding of the meaning of moral judgments is this: to judge that an act is morally wrong is to say that it is rational for the broader society to blame, shame, and resent any (responsible) agent that performs that action (due to motivational deficiencies). In other words, saying that an act is wrong is to say that it is rational for society to place social sanctions against that action. Note that this is still agnostic as to what our moral principles ought to be (could be deontlogical, consequentialist or even unprinciples, it depends on one's theory of rationality). However, it does say that a moral judgment that X is wrong is true if and only if it is rational for a society to blame, shame, resent someone for performing that action X (different normative theories have different answers for what we ought to blame, shame, resent, etc.). Therefore, moral judgments are true based on whether or not certain feelings are *rational*. Thus, moral judgments are *objectively* if and only if judgments of the rationality of blame are *objective*. But we already established that there are objective conditions for the rationality of attitudes, emotions, feelings in general (e.g. pride, fear, anger, etc.). Thus, to be consistent, we should believe that whether or not a society is rational to regulate their sentiments of blame, shame, resentment, etc. is also objective. Therefore, moral judgments are objective.

