It is certainly possible that the Black-White IQ difference is largely genetic; there's no necessary law suggesting that that cannot be the case. But questions about IQ differences are empirical questions. Therefore, in order to test and quantify whether such genetic differences exist, we need empirical data. Adoption studies, I believe, are the most effective method to quantify just *how much* of the IQ gap is genetic versus environmental. If blacks & whites are reared in the same environment, then any arising differences are genetically caused. Inversely, if different groups of blacks are genetically similar, then any arising differences are environmentally caused. There are four major transracial adoption studies that I know of. I will consider each:

**Study 1**: Minnesota Transracial Adoption Study

This one is fairly popular, so I need not give it too much detail. Basically, the study examined the IQs of mixed children, black children, and white children who were adopted by white families. The study found higher IQ for the whites adoptees compared to the black and mixed adoptees [[1]](http://www.kjplanet.com/amp-31-10-726.pdf). If this study did indeed equalize the environments for blacks & whites, then the results would seem to indicate that the IQ gap is largely genetic. However, there are a few reasons to doubt that the study equalized the environments for blacks & whites:

(a) the children with two black parents were adopted substantially later than the other children. The average white child was adopted at about 19 months old, but the average black child was adopted at 32 months old [[2]](http://www.kjplanet.com/amp-31-10-726.pdf). The results of the study showed that children who were adopted later had much lower IQs than those who were adopted earlier. For example, black children adopted within one year of birth had IQs 7 points higher than black children adopted later [[3]](https://lesacreduprintemps19.files.wordpress.com/2012/12/the-minnesota-transracial-adoption-study-a-follow-up-of-iq-test-performance-at-adolescence1.pdf).

(b), while the study did somewhat equalize environments *after* adoption, they failed to equalize environments *before* adoption, which can be extremely important. For example, a high blood lead level in infants can result in a noticeable reduction in IQ during adulthood [[4]](http://www.precaution.org/lib/low-level_lead_longterm_followup.19921001.pdf). Blood lead level is particularly important for the blacks in this study because, when this study was published in the 1970s, the blood lead level of black children aged 6 months-5 years was *extremely* higher than the level for white children of the same age [[5]](http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/ad/ad079acc.pdf). Thus, blood lead level disparities could have instigated or exaggerated IQ disparities. Blood lead level is just one example; factors such as social stimulation before adoption are also important to a child's cognitive development, but the study could not have equalized such factors. An adoption study would have looked at Blacks & Whites adopted *at birth* by similar families, but sadly no such study exists.

It should be noted that despite little-to-no IQ gains, the black and mixed race children saw considerably higher levels of academic achievement than their non-adopted racial peers. The mixed adoptees scored in the 60th, 59th, 50th, and 40th percentiles in vocabulary scores, reading scores, mathematics scores, and class rank, respectively [[6]](https://lesacreduprintemps19.files.wordpress.com/2012/12/the-minnesota-transracial-adoption-study-a-follow-up-of-iq-test-performance-at-adolescence1.pdf). So even though the mixed race children had below-average IQ scores, they had somewhat average marks in academic achievement. For reference, the White adoptees scored in the 62th, 58th, 56th and 54th percentiles in those respective areas. 

The Black adoptees scored worse; they scored in the 54th, 48th, 36th, and 36th percentile in vocabulary scores, reading scores, mathematics scores, and class rank, respectively. Note that the 36th percentile is not *that* low (an IQ score in the 36th percentile, for example, is ~95). Further, this lower achievement could be the result of the environmental issues I presented earlier. In any case, these scores are much higher than what might be suggested by the average Black IQ of 85, which is in the 15th percentile. So while the IQs of the Black adoptees were much lower, their academic achievement was not much lower than average.

In summary, this study has a few issues. But, even ignoring the issues and assuming that it's compatible with a genetic explanation of the IQ gap, it seems compatible with an environmental explanation of the *academic achievement* gap. This is significant because, I would say, academic achievement is more important than IQ; academic achievement is desirable as a direct *end*, while IQ is an instrumental good, desirable only as a *means* to other ends like academic achievement, productivity, etc. This is the only transracial adoption study that I've found that is somewhat in favor of a mainly genetic explanation of the IQ gap (and even then, it still implies that actual achievement is environmentally caused). The next three studies seem to suggest otherwise.

**Study 2**: German IQ study by Klaus Eyferth

Psychologist Klaus Eyferth studied the IQs of white and mixed children in Germany. The mothers of the children were all white. Their fathers were either white or black members of the US occupation forces. The white children recorded an average IQ of 97.2, whereas the mixed children recorded an average of 96.5, a negligible difference [[7]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eyferth_study).

There are some issues with this study, however. Firstly, the samples aren't representative of the average population, because about 30% of black applicants were rejected admission to the armed forces, while only about 3% of whites were rejected. However, despite the unrepresentative sample, if IQ were genetic, then we would still expect the white children to have much higher scores than the mixed children because:

(a) The white GIs should have had higher scores than the black GIs. Even though the admission test filtered out candidates below a certain threshold, the IQ scores for the white soldiers would *still* be distributed higher than the blacks, leading to a higher average score (imagine a Black and White IQ bell curve, with both bell curves being cut off below a certain threshold - the White IQ bell curve should yield a higher average). If the IQ gap were genetic, then we would expect this difference to be found in their children as well.

(b) [Regression to the mean](https://www.uic.edu/classes/bms/bms655/lesson11.html). Even if we ignore point (a) and assume the white and black soldiers had similar IQ scores, then, if the IQ gap were genetic, we would still expect the mixed children to have lower IQs than the white children. The reason is because the mixed children IQs would partially regress downward to the black mean, while the white children IQs would regress to the white mean. Regression to the mean is found in other genetic traits such as height, so if the IQ gap were mainly genetic, then regression to the mean should be found in this study.

The study had other issues as well. For example, about 20-25% of the Black GIs were actually French North African. Still, we should expect 75-80% of the Black GIs to have lower IQs, and, if the IQ gap were largely genetic, this difference should be found in the children. The lack of an IQ gap implies that the IQ gap is not largely genetic. Therefore, while flawed, this study is compatible with a mainly environmental explanation of the IQ gap.

**Study 3**: British study of young children in nurseries

In this study, psychologist Barbara Tizard studied black, white, and mixed children raised in British long-stay residential nurseries. The children were given psychological tests to determine their cognitive abilities. The scores were converted to give a mean of 100, and a standard deviation of 10. On one test, the white children scored 102.6 and the black/mixed children scored 106.3. On another test, the white children scored 98.5 and the black/mixed children scored 98.6. On the Minnesota Nonverbal test, the white children scored 101.3 and the black/mixed children scored 107.7 [[8]](http://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/1127540.pdf?acceptTC=true). Apparently there is a fourth test, but I didn't manage to see it in the pdf. In any case, this study is compatible with a mainly environmental explanation of the IQ gap.

**Study 4**: IQ scores of black children raised by White families versus Black families

In this study, psychologist Elsie Moore compared IQ test scores among 23 black children adopted by middle-class white families and 23 age-matched black children adopted by middle-class black families. The black children adopted by black families scored a 104 IQ, while the black children adopted by white families scored a 117 IQ [[9]](http://psycnet.apa.org/psycinfo/1986-24139-001). These two groups of blacks likely differed in their *environment* and not their *genes*. Therefore, the difference in the black/white family environments likely accounts for the 13 IQ point gap. Keep in mind that the black & white families were of similar socioeconomic status (middle-class). In actuality, the average black family has a much lower socioeconomic status than the average white family; therefore the difference in black/white environments would probably account for more than 13 IQ points. Clearly, this study is compatible with a mainly environmental explanation of the IQ gap.

part 2 of 2

**Objections:** Many have criticized the three latter studies because they did not do follow-up testing on the children. It is true that the genetic component of IQ increases as people age. However, this decline is not necessarily relevant. We are concerned with the *gap* between blacks & whites. The Minnesota Transracial Study implies that there is no significant change in the *gap* after age 7. Looking at this study, the black-white IQ gap fluctuated by only about 2 points after age 7. Therefore, assuming that the MTAS study is accurate in this regard, the lack of follow-up studies is no good reason to discount the latter three studies. If the IQ gap was small for younger children, then it seems reasonable to conclude that it would likely remain as such. 

Also, heritability of IQ in children is fairly significant (about 45%), therefore genes play a significant role in the IQ of children. This means that if Blacks were genetically predisposed to significantly lower IQs than Whites, then we would not expect similar IQ scores between Blacks and Whites raised in similar environment *even as children*. Insofar as IQ is significantly heritable in children, and insofar as there are significant genetic racial IQ disparities, we should expect a significant racial IQ gap at childhood even after equalizing environments. Therefore, the lack of an IQ gap during childhood after equalizing environments implies that either (a) the genetic component of IQ is not significant during childhood, or (b) there is no significant genetic Black-White IQ gap. We know that (a) is false, so (b) must be true.

Also, I couldn't really find a good spot to place this paragraph, but: from the Moore Study, it should be noted that the 117 IQ of the Black children (aged 7-10) is similar to the 118 IQ of White children (aged 7) adopted into White families according to the Minnesota Transracial Adoption Study. These figures are also similar to the 119 IQ of Korean children adopted into White families according to [this study](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0191886989902468). So the IQ scores of the adopted Black children are fairly similar to the IQ scores of adopted White/Asian children, a phenomenon that we would expect to see if the IQ gap were almost entirely environmental. We would not necessarily expect to see this if there were a significant genetic IQ gap, because (again) the heritability of IQ is significant even for children (about 45%), and therefore genetic intelligence differences (if they existed) would manifest themselves in measured IQ differences even in children. 

Lastly on the Moore study, the significance of this study is not just the high IQ of the Black children; it's significant mainly because it demonstrates that the environment of the Black parents is not as conducive to cognitive development as the environment of the White parents *even when both groups of parents are upper-middle class*. I don't know the cause of this disparity (different people would argue for different causes, with possible explanations being parenting, lead, peer groups, wealth, schools, culture, neighborhoods, etc.), but it's clear from this study that Black and White *environments* have significantly different effects on IQ (causing a *13*-point IQ difference). And this *environmental* difference persists even though both groups of parents are *upper-middle class*. Imagine what the difference would have been if we did *not* ensure that both parents were upper-middle class. If the Black parents were, say, disproportionately poor (as is the case in reality), then we would expect that 13-point IQ difference to widen.

**Conclusion**: It seems to me that the evidence suggests that the IQ gap is almost entirely environmental. The Minnesota study is the only adoption study that suggests otherwise, but it has flaws (as I've indicated earlier). The German study also has many flaws as well, but the latter two studies seem to support it. So three of the studies are compatible with a predominantly environmental explanation of the IQ gap. Taking a holistic account of all of the adoption studies seems to suggest that the IQ gap is, for the most part, environmental. The only way you could conclude otherwise is if you fully accepted the results of the MTAS and disregarded the latter three studies. But even if you fully accepted the results of the MTAS and disregarded the latter three studies, then you would still have to admit that the *academic achievement* gap (arguably more important than IQ) is mainly environmental rather than genetic. 

Therefore: if we interpret the data most favorably for an environmental explanation, then we have three studies saying "the IQ gap is predominantly environmental." On the other hand, if we interpret the data most favorably for a genetic explanation, then we have *one* study saying "the IQ gap is mainly genetic, but the academic achievement gap is mainly environmental". So the *best case scenario* for a genetic explanation of the IQ gap still implies that environmental differences can explain most of the academic achievement gap. But if the races can attain roughly equal academic achievement, then I don't really care about IQ differences. 

So that's all the data (that I'm aware of) that we have for transracial adoption studies with Black children. Even if you disagree with my interpretation, I hope that (at the very least) this post has been valuable as a coherent collection of all of the transracial adoption studies along with their biggest criticisms. With all of the raw data laid bare in one place, you can provide your own interpretation of the data that you find most compelling. Of course, there are very few of these adoption studies and many of them have several problems (which I hope to have made clear in this post), which means no interpretation is going to be perfect. Nevertheless, I believe the interpretation that I've provided here is the most reasonable response to the evidence. 
_____

**Sources**

* [1] [Minnesota Transracial Adoption](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minnesota_Transracial_Adoption_Study)
* [2] [Minnesota Transracial Adoption](http://www.kjplanet.com/amp-31-10-726.pdf) - Pages 730 & 732 
* [3] [Minnesota Transracial Adoption, follow-up](https://lesacreduprintemps19.files.wordpress.com/2012/12/the-minnesota-transracial-adoption-study-a-follow-up-of-iq-test-performance-at-adolescence1.pdf) - Page 123
* [4] [Lead & IQ](http://www.precaution.org/lib/low-level_lead_longterm_followup.19921001.pdf)
* [5] [Blood lead levels](http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/ad/ad079acc.pdf) - Page 6
* [6] [Minnesota Transracial Adoption, follow-up](https://lesacreduprintemps19.files.wordpress.com/2012/12/the-minnesota-transracial-adoption-study-a-follow-up-of-iq-test-performance-at-adolescence1.pdf) - Page 129
* [7] [Eyferth IQ Study](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eyferth_study)
* [8] [Tizard IQ Study](http://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/1127540.pdf?acceptTC=true) - Page 351
* [9] [Moore IQ Study](http://psycnet.apa.org/psycinfo/1986-24139-001)
