I believe the best argument for atheism is the Problem of Evil (PoE). Every variation of PoE asserts that there (probably) exists some type of evil (gratuitous evil, excessive evil, etc.). My objection to PoE lies in such assertions. Two qualifications about my objection must be acknowledged. First, my objection is intended to be limited in scope to apply only under moral realism. I limit the scope in such a way for brevity (also, many advocates of PoE are also advocates of moral realism, so my objection should at least be significant to them). Second, I take God to be a being with omnipotence, omniscience and perfect goodness. Essentially, my claim is that, under moral realism, the Problem of Evil fails to decrease the likelihood of God. Note that when I say PoE “fails”, I mean that a reasonable theist could encounter PoE without losing confidence in their belief. The reason is because such a theist can claim that God can falsify the assertion that “there probably exists of some form of evil”, without changing any empirical facts about the world.

Let us first consider the nature of moral propositions such as “torture is wrong”. Under moral realism, the truth of this moral proposition is based on objective features of the world, as opposed to human inclination. For example, this is unlike the proposition “green is the best color”, which has truth dependent on human inclination. Rather, it’s like the proposition “the Earth is orbited by one moon”, which has truth dependent on objects in our solar system. The truth of such propositions will be changed insofar as the relevant features of the world are changed. For example, the truth of the proposition “there exists an apple on the table” depends on features of the world (a potential apple, for example). Thus, most humans can falsify the proposition “there exists an apple on the table”, because most humans have sufficient power to change the relevant features (removing the apple, for example). 

Most humans could not, however, change the truth of a proposition such as “the Earth is orbited by one moon”, because most humans lack the power to change the features that make this proposition true. This is not to say that it’s metaphysically impossible for such features to change. Rather, the set of features that humans have the power to change is smaller than the set of features that are metaphysically possible to be changed. It just so happens that the features related to the previous proposition lies inside the latter set, but outside of the former set.

An omnipotent being, such as God, faces no such issue. I consider an omnipotent being to be a being such that: the set of features that He has the power to change is as large as the set of features that are metaphysically possible to be changed. That is to say a being is omnipotent if and only if He can do anything that’s metaphysically possible. Therefore, God could change the truth of the proposition “the Earth is orbited by one moon”, because the features relevant to this proposition – the moon, the Earth, etc. – lies within the set of features that are metaphysically possible to be changed, implying that God can change these features.

Back to moral propositions. Under moral realism, the truth of propositions such as “torture is wrong” depends on objective features of the world. The features that make this proposition true, and every other moral proposition true, are contingent rather than necessary; there seems to be nothing metaphysically necessary or logically necessary with “torture is wrong”, for example. Thus, God could change the truth of every moral proposition, since He has the ability to do anything that’s metaphysically possible. Thus, God could falsify “evil exists”, “gratuitous evil probably exists” or any other moral premise of PoE. So PoE fails, because a reasonable theist could assert that evil doesn’t actually exist in the moral sense.

Wanting to defend PoE, an atheist could respond with something along the following lines: moral propositions are not metaphysically necessary, but they do depend on human nature. That is, given the way human nature is, certain moral propositions are necessarily true. For example, the proposition “the oldest person in the room is male” is certainly not necessarily true. However, given that there are males, and only males, in the room, then the proposition “the oldest person in the room is male” is necessarily true. The atheist might argue that moral propositions are similar in the sense that some moral facts are necessary given human nature. Thus, the only way God can change the truth of moral propositions would be to also change human nature, but changing human nature seems to render current arguments moot. So no, a theist could not deny that evil exists; given the way human nature is, evil must exist.

This response asserts the proposition “moral facts depend on human nature” (note that this is not to say that moral facts are subjective. For example, medical diagnosis are objective, but they also depend on human nature). Presumably, this proposition is made true by objective features of the world. If so, then God could certainly change the truth of this proposition without changing human nature (surely, the proposition “moral facts depend on human nature” does not itself depend on human nature). Therefore, God could falsify this proposition, granting himself the ability to change moral facts while holding human nature fixed. With this ability, He could falsify the moral premises of PoE without changing anything about human nature. Using very similar reasoning, He could more generally falsify the moral premises of PoE without changing any empirical facts about the world. Thus, PoE fails, because a reasonable theist could assert that evil doesn’t really exist in the moral sense, even after holding fixed all empirical facts about the world.

An atheist wanting to defend PoE might say: sure, God could change moral propositions without changing empirical facts about the world, but so what? Why should we care about morality if it’s independent of our interests? Even if PoE cannot show that a perfectly good being (probably) does not exist, it can show that an uncaring God (probably) does not exist.

My instinctive reply to this response is that it’s almost tautologically true that we should care about morality (since morality concerns what we should do). This is not just a philosopher’s semantic game either. Plenty of theists justify seemingly horrendous acts allowed by God by appealing to His “Grand Plan”. Implicit in this appeal is the idea that whatever God allows must be good somehow (although they probably have never explicitly asserted that it’s good because God made it good). So my objection to PoE cannot be dismissed as a philosophical absurdity; similar sentiments exists (either implicitly or explicitly) in the minds of many theists. This is problematic for PoE since a theist could reasonably dismiss its force. 

There are a few more responses that a PoE defender could make that I lack space to consider. The first, obviously, is to reject moral realism. The second response would be to affirm moral realism, but claim that some moral propositions are metaphysically necessary. Finally, one might affirm moral realism, deny that moral propositions are necessary, but assert that there is evidence that moral propositions like “torture is wrong” or “moral facts depend on human nature”, while contingent, are probably true. For these latter two potential responses, I must admit that I’m not sure how such arguments would work. Apart from these latter two responses (which seem impossible to reasonably argue for), however, it seems that the Problem of Evil fails under moral realism.

