# Michael Smith, The Moral Problem

## What is the Moral Problem

Consider the following two distinctive features of moral discourse:

1. The *practicality* of morality.
    - *Rationality* - judging that an act is morally right implies that one has reason to perform the act.
    - *Motivation* - judging that an act is morally right (because of the rationality of moral judgments) implies that one has some motivation to perform the act.
2. The *objectivity* of morality. 
    - *Correctness* - we suppose that moral judgments can be correct, which implies a domain of moral facts about which we can form (true or false) beliefs.
    - *Agent-Neutral* - no one is better placed to discover them than anyone else. The only relevant determinate for the rightness of an act is the *circumstances* that the action takes place, regardless of *who* finds themselves in those circumstances.
    - *Accessible* - by engaging in moral conversation and argument, we can discover objective moral facts.

According to the standard picture of psychology (from Hume), there are two kinds of psychological states - beliefs and desires. Beliefs represent how the world is, and thus can be evaluated based on the accuracy of their representations. Desires represent how the world is to be, and thus cannot be evaluated on the basis of any accuracy of the world. According to Hume, these states of mind are conceptually distinct. Thus, it is always possible to pull them apart modally; for any belief-desire pair, we can conceive of someone with one state of mind and not the other. Because of this, desires are not in themselves subject to rational assessments; they are merely arrational dispositions that we have. Action is thus the product of these two states: an action X requires that someone have a desire P be true and a belief that action X will make it the case that P becomes true.

These two features plus the Humean psychology creates the following three claims:

1. Moral judgments express a belief about an objective fact.
2. If A judges that it is morally right X then he is motivated to X
3. An agent is motivated to X only if he has some appropriate desire.

(1) suggests that moral judgments express beliefs. (2) and (3) suggest that moral judgments express desires. But, according to the standard Humean picture, beliefs and desires are distinct experiences, so this cannot be possible. This creates the Moral Problem, which is the organizing problem explaining much disagreement in metaethics. Different metaethical positions reject different claims in this dilemma. The expressivists deny (1), the externalists deny (2) and the non-Humeans deny (3).

This books argues that we can accept (1) and (2) and much of the spirit of (3). The major sub-plot of the book concerns how much of the Humean theory of motivation can be rejected or accepted. The argument turns on a distinction between kinds of reasons: normative and motivating. We should accept Hume's claim that beliefs and desires are distinct experience that are essential to explaining the motivating reasons behind every human action. But we should reject his claims that desires are beyond rational criticism. This will be based on an anti-Humean theory of normative reasons. In essence, moral judgments express desires that an agent believes they would have if they were fully rational.

## The Expressivist Challenge

### Alleged Dilemma of Descriptivism

Expressivism denies (1) that moral judgments express beliefs, and (2) that moral judgments are capable of truth. Rather, moral judgments express a speaker's (dispositions to have) attitudes of approval and disapproval, which are incapable of being true or false. We will consider Ayer's argument for expressivism, which comes from considering the only two forms of descriptivism - naturalism and non-naturalism.

Naturalism defines ethical terms in the form of non-ethical terms, e.g. utilitarian theories define goodness in terms of pleasure, happiness, satisfaction, etc; subjectivist theories define goodness in terms of the approval of certain individuals or societies. However, such analysis cannot be correct because for any naturalistic property 'N', it is never *self-contradictory* to say that N is sometimes not good. But this is impossible if there were such a naturalistic property 'N' that 'good' could be defined in terms of. Thus, there is no such naturalistic property 'N' to define 'good', which means naturalism is false.

Non-naturalism maintains that ethical concepts are irreducible to empirical concepts. Such a theory must maintain that ethical concepts are controlled by an "intellectual intuitionism". But such a theory cannot be emprically verifiable. Clearly, certain things may seem intuitive to some people but not to others, and there is no verifiable method to choose whose intuitions to trust. Since non-naturalism mantains that ethical propositions are genuine synthetic propositions which are not empirically verifiable, non-naturalism must be false (since, according to Ayer, all meaningful synthetic propositions are empirically verifiable).

### Non-Naturalism

Ayer's objection to non-naturalism is problematic because it depends on the merits of a controverisal theory of meaning - logical positivism. But there are other problems with non-naturalism that Ayer never mentioned. Ayer's general criticism against non-naturalism was its barren epistemology, and this can be revealed independent of logical positivism, as Simon Blackburn pointed did. 

If we are to enrich our ontology with special entities (i.e. moral facts), we need to have some method of accessing such facts, but non-naturalism seems to have no adequate answer (independent of logical positivism). The only epistemic method for learning of moral facts seems to be some sort of intuitive faculty analogous to *causal perceptual awareness* (independent moral facts *cause* perceptions that product moral judgments). The problem is this cannot explain a plattitude of moral reasoning: the *supervenience* of the moral on the natural. Everyone agrees that the moral properties of an entity *supervenes* on that entity's natural properties. Moreover, everyone agrees that this is an *a priori* truth. Recognition of the supervience of the moral on the non-moral is a constraint on the proper use of moral concepts.

Intuition is incompatible with supervenience because it cannot explain how merely *perceiving* that a certain entity with natural properties N and moral properties M can explain the *a priori* truth that all entities with natural properties N also have moral properties M. One possible explanation might be to say that after witnessing the coinstantiation of N and M and one circumstance, we generalize to other cases. But this faces two problems. 

1. It doesn't explain why it's an *a priori* truth. Just because one has perceived properties N and M together in one circumstances does not *guarantee* that properties N and M are *always* coinstantiated. Instead, this would be an inductive argument yielding a *contingent* and *a posteriori* truth. 
2. Moral reasoning very often involves *imagined* or *described* situations, not *perceived* situations. We form moral judgments about these imagine situations via general standards. But how can we *perceive* the applicability of general standards? How can we *perceive* the timelessness and universality of these general standards? And how can they be guaranteed a priori? It seems that a causal perceptual explanation of moral judgments cannot explain the cases where we form judgments about an imagined situation that could not have *caused* any of our judgments.

### Metaphysical (Synthetic) Naturalism
 
*Property identity rather than conceptual identity*. One response to Ayer denies that naturalism is a metaphysical thesis rather than a definitional thesis. It is a claim about property identities, not a claim about definitional identities. Thus, it could be possible that moral property M and natural property N are identical, whereby this would be a non-analytic (synthetic), *a posteriori*, necessary identity.

*Reference-fixing descriptions succeed with color terms*. A similar strategy can be done by identifying color properties with certain surface reflectance properties. This identity need not be definitional, and can be handled in the way we handle proper names. For example, we could say that the word "red" refers to the surface reflectance property of objects that is causally responsible for our usage of the word red. This would be identifying the *property* redness with some surface reflectance property, but it would not be to identifying the *concepts* of redness with any surface reflectance property (surely, our *concepts* of redness was prior to any concepts of surface reflectance properties regarding light wavelengths). The general strategy to give a property identity of X is to posit a reference fixing description of X, which allows us to learn *a posteriori* which property that picks out that description and therefore X.

*Reference-fixing descriptions fail with moral terms*. This strategy fails for moral terms because naturalists would have to choose a description to fix the reference of moral terms. However, they must do so in a way that moral terms do not have different content in different contexts. But this is impossible if, for example, moral terms are used to refer to the naturalistic feature of properties that are causally responsible for our usage of those moral terms. It's possible that two persons' (or two societies') uses of moral terms are caused by different naturalistic properties. In that case, when these two persons or societies use moral terms different (say, to criticize each other), then they wouldn't even be disagreeing (i.e. their assertions would not be incompatible), because their terms would have different referents. This is promotes a radical relativism, which is inconsistent with the *objectivity* of morality.

### Conceptual Analysis

*Parodox of Analysis*. Ayer's argument against definitional naturalism was the Open Question Argument: (1) for natural property N it is coherent to entertain the possibility to N is or is not identical to any normative property M, (2) if it is coherent to entertain the possibility that N and M are not identical, then N and M are not conceptually identical, (3) therefore there is no natural property which is conceptually identical to any normative property M. The problem with this argument is the 2nd premise (2). It is a common fact about analyses that concept X may constitute a correct analysis of concept Y despite it being possible to coherently entertain whether something that fits the criteria of X also fits the criteria of Y (or vice versa). This is known as the Parodox of Analysis (that a conceptual analysis can be analytic while also unobvious informative) and is common to all of philosophy. Consider some possibilities: (i) the concept of being red and the concept of having properties that cause the appearance of redness, (ii) the concept of knowledge and the concept of justified true belief, (iii) the concept of intentional actions and the concept of actions motivated by desire.

*Plattitude Encapsulation*. Ayer and Moore misunderstood the purpose of conceptual analysis. An analysis of a concept is successful if it encapsulates all and only plattitudes which are necessary to come to have mastery of that concept. This is not to say that if someone is a master of the concept that they will be aware of these plattitudes off the top of their head. Rather, these plattitudes must capture the inferential and judgmental dispositions of those who do in fact have mastery of the concept. Such an analysis should provide the means to learn everything there is to know *a priori* about the concept. This can explain the Parodox of Analysis. Even though someone who has mastery of a concept must *have* certain inferential and judgment dispositions, it may not be transparent what those inferential and judgmental dispositions *are*. Thus, one need not know what the best systematization of the plattitudes that describe those dispositions is. Whereas mastery of a concept requires knowledge*-how*, mastery of an analysis requires knowledge-*that*. A similar phenomenon can be found with grammatical norms (e.g. order of adjectives), or even implicit societal norms that regulate behavior (e.g. conversational distance).

Some plattitudes of the color red include "the redness of objects cause us to see them as red", "red is more similar to orange than to green", "prototypical examples are needed to teach redness", etc. These would be a summary-style analysis of "red" instead of a straightforward dictionary-style definition.

The plattitudes about the concept of 'rightness', descriptions of the inferences and judgments that a mster of the concept is disposed to make, include the following: (1) *practicality*: if A judges X-ing to be right, then A has some motivation to X (assuming they are rational), (2) *objectivity*: if A judges X-ing to be right and B judges X-ing to not be right, then at least one of them are incorrect, (3) *supervenience*: acts with the same non-moral features have the same moral features, (4) *substance*: right acts are concerned with human flourishing, are expressive of equal concern and respect, etc. and (5) *procedure*: moral arguments have a coherentist form (i.e. reflective equilibrium); when two parties have different moral judgments, they tend to try to resolve the disagreement by appeal to more general moral principles that they can agree to.

### Reductive Definitional (Analytic) Naturalism

*Failure of reductive definitions thus far*. The naturalistic analysis pondered by Ayer do fail because they miss some key plattitudes of moral terms. Subjective definitional naturalism can capture moral supervenience and the practicality of morality, but not the objectivity. Non-subjective definitional naturalism can capture moral supervenience and the objectivity of morality, but not the practicality. But there can be other possibilities for a reductive definitional analysis.

*Network Anlyses*. A non-reductive dispositional analysis is just one kind of definitional naturalistic analysis. Another analysis could be a network analysis. A network analysis of moral terms is a reductive, explicit (i.e. non-summary style) analysis that simply says that moral properties are the natural properties that are related to each other in the ways that moral plattitudes purport (if such natural properties do exist). It doesn't follow that there are any moral properties, for there may not be any natural properties that meet the plattitudes demanded by morality.

*Permutation Problem*. Network analyses about a realm of concepts can face a permutation problem in that they risk being unable to explain the uniqueness of certain properties. For example, on a network analysis of colors, color properties would be reduced to natural properties that stand in relation to each other in a manner appropriate for the plattitudes of colors (i.e. red objects are just those that appear red, oranage those that appear to be orange, etc.). The problem is that there may be a property that stands in set of relations isomorphic to the set of relations that red stands in to, but this property could equally well be isomorphic to orange, or green, etc. And so it wouldn't be able to distinguish *which* properties were which color. There are no *a priori* plattitudes that can fix exactly which physical properties ground which color properties (plattitudes like "red is the color of blood" is not an *a priori* plattitude.

*Failure to capture a posteriori paradigmatic learned explemplars of a concept*. The problem with network analyses regarding colors is that we learn many of our colors *a posteriori* via paradigmatic examples of physical properties that exhibit certain colors. These are not any *a priori* plattitudes central to our color concepts. This is why network analyses fail concerning colors. But the same issue arises for moral terms. Our moral terms are highly interconnected and dependent on each other. We learn of rightness and wrongness, good and bad procedures, etc. by reference to *a posteriori* paradigmatic examples of things with those features. This cannot be met by a reductive, explicit network analysis.

The only solution to avoid the expressivist challenge is to provide a non-reductive, summary-style naturalistic analysis of moral concepts. This shall be given later.

## The Externalist Challenge

Consider two forms of internalism:

1. Practicality of moral judgment: if A judges that it is right to do X, then either A has some motivation to do X, or A is practically irrational (e.g. absent weakness of will, depression, etc.).
2. Rationalism: it is right for A to do X only if there is a reason for A to do X.

*Rationalism is a stronger thesis than the practicality requirement*, for anyone who accepts rationalism must also accept the practicality of moral judgment, but the reverse need not hold. Rationalism entails practicality because of the following plattitudes about the nature of reasons: an agent has reason to X only if that agent would be motivated to do X insofar as he is rational; as a consequence, an agent who judges themself to have reason to do X would be motivated to do X insofar as he is rational. Similarly, as a consequence of rationalism, judging that an action is right entails a judgment that one has reason to perform the action. Therefore, if rationalism is true, then to judge that an action is right entails judging that one has reason to perform the action, which entails that one would be motivated to perform the action insofar as one is rational.

On the other hand, one can accept the practicality of moral judgment while denying rationalism. For example, if moral judgments are just expressions of preference or desire, then they would be motivating to the extent that preferences and desires are. But these preferences or desires need not be requirements of reason, so rationalism doesn't follow.

Opponents to the practicality of morality (from Brink) and rationalism (from Foot) shall be considered in turn.

### Practicality Requirement

*The Amoralist: conceptual mastery requires appropriate extensionality and cause of term-usage*. David Brink argues that we can conceive of an Amoralist, someone who recognizes the existence of moral considerations and remoains unmoved to follow the duties prescribed. The defender of the practicality of rationality must deny that such a person is conceivable, that such an idea is incoherent. However, it certainly seems conceivable, according to Brink, because such an amoralist can use moral terms to pick out the exact same properties that we do, and their usage would be guided by the same entities that guide our usage. Interanalists accept that one can reliably apply moral terms, but they affirm that the amoralist doesn't actually regard a duty as a moral demand; rather the duties are regarded as the demands of conventional morality, i.e. they use moral terms using "Inverted" Commas" around the terms. According to David Brink, this is a poor response: we *can* imagine that someone genuinely accepts a duty as being moral without being moved.

*Analogy with the color-blind: conceptual mastery can require physiological counterpart*. The "Inverted Commas" reply is on the right track but mistaken: it is not that amoralists are making a kind of judgment different than that of moral judgments (i.e. judgments about societal uses of moral terms); rather, they are sincerely trying to make a moral judgment, but they *fail*. Consider an analogy with someone who is (color-)blind from birth, but who has a reliable method of using color terms. We can imagine that she has technological assistance to determine the surface reflectance properties of any object with ease. Such a person could use colors with the same extension as everyone else, and her uses could be determined by the same entities that determine our uses, and her judgments needn't be equivalent to expressing the color judgments of other people. However, some argue that such a person wouldn't really have master of color terms; for it is constitutive of possessing color concepts and mastering color concepts that one have the appropriate visual experiences under suitable conditions, which means they would be failing to make color judgments. A similar argument can be made for the use of moral terms by alleged amoralists. The question, then, is whether the appropriate extension and causal explanation of one's use of a term implies that they possess mastery the concepts in question, or whether a further physiological phenomenon may be necessary (e.g. visual experiences, motivation, etc.).

*Explain the reliable connection with motivation without moral fetishism*. The account of mastery that requires the further physiological phenomenon should be preferred because it alone can provide an explanation of the reliable connection between moral judgment and motivation in the good and strong-willed person. To illustrate this connection, imagine someone who enters a debate about which political party to support states that they ought to vote for party X beacuse it promotes values ABC and for that reason they will vote for X. But then they are convinced that party Y actually promotes values ABC far better. We can reliably expect that this person (in normal circumstances) will have a newfound motivation to vote for party Y assuming they are sincerely convinced. It seems that this reliable connection cannot be explained by the externalist. The externalist will have to explain the connection because the agent is contingently a good and strong-willed person. It is one's contingent motivation to do that which is right combined with the belief that X is right which explains why one is motivated to do X, not the *mere* belief that X is right. The problem with this is that it characterizes a good person as not one who has non-derivative motivation to promote justice, equality, well-being, etc. but rather as someone who has non-derivative motivation to do what is right and (because of a belief that justice, equality, well-being, etc. are right) a derived motivation to do those things. This doesn't seem to capture the motivations of common people or who we would consider good people; it treats moral virtue as a kind of moral fetish.

### Rationality Requirement

*Morality as a system of Hypothetical Imperatives*. Philippa Foot rejects Kant's claim that moral facts are facts about reasons for action and instead argues for an anti-rational institutional account of moral facts. Foot concedes that moral requirements purport to be categorical imperatives rather than hypothetical imperatives, i.e. the considerations that determine whether an agent has a moral duty depends soley on the agent's *circustances* rather than his *desires* or *interests*. However, she notes that this is also the case with ettiquette, i.e. the rules of ettiquette that apply to a person depend only on that person's *circumstances* not their desires or interests. For example, if someone says that their desires would be satisfied by replying to a letter in the first person that was written in the third, it doesn't follow that they did not violate a norm of ettiquette, or that they "shouldn't" (from the perspective of ettiquette) have acted as they did. So both ettiquette and morality issue categorical imperatives as opposed to the hypothetical imperatives issued by prudential rationality. However, this is not enough to suggest that the "shoulds" from ettiquette are requirements of reasons, so it also cannot be enough to suggest that the "shoulds" from morality are requirements of reason. Therefore, there needs to be a different argument to show that morality provides requirements of rationality. But this seems implausible because the traditional view of practical rationality links reasons for action with an agent's ends or goals, making practical rationality a system of hypothetical imperatives. Thus, moral facts should be seen, as with ettiquette, as institutional facts.

*Cannot account for practicality*. One objection to an institutional account of moral facts is that it cannot account for the practicality of moral judgments, which was already shown to be true. An agent who recognizes the demands prescribed by a system of institutional duties need not necessarily have any corresponding motivation to act in accordance with those demands, without revealing any practical rationality. One's motivation for acting in accord with the demands of ettiquette or the law is purely contingent; to the extent that such a motivation exists, it is a derivative motivation that is based on either a non-derivative motivation to obey the law or ettiquette or some other non-derivative motivation that would be promoted by following the law/ettiquette. Such an institutional analysis may be able to account for law or ettiquette, but it cannot appropriately capture the practicality of morality (see above).

*Morality connected to Rationality*. Another objection to Foot's conception of moral facts as institutional facts is an argument against her assumption that practical rationality is a system of hypothetical imperatives, i.e. that one has a reason for action insofar as it promotes some end that he presently holds. This argument will be given later. Assuming that this argument succeeds and that requirements of practical rationality are *categorical* rather than hypothetical, then an argument to explain why the categorical requirements of morality connect to the categorical requirements of rationality. The argument can be given as follows: (1) moral requirements apply to rational agents as such; (2) we expect (in the sense of predict) rational agents to act as they are morally required; therefore (3) being rational, as such, must suffice to ground our expectation (prediction) that rational agents behave morally; (4) the only thing that we can expect (predict) rational agents as such to do is that they behave as they are rationally required; therefore, (5) we must think of moral requirements as categorical requirements of reason or rationality.

*Objectivity + Practicality => we expect moral behavior* The controversial premise is premise (2) that we expect rational agents to do what they are morally required to do. It is already shown that agents will be motivated to do what they judge to be moral, so it can follow that that we expect rational agents to do what they judge themselves morally required to do. This is not suffice to show that we expect rational agents to do what they are morally required to do, for different rational agents might form different judgments about their moral requirements without being irrational. But this is not possible given the plattitude of objectivity (i.e. that all rational agents will converge to the same moral judgments insofar as they are rational). Thus, the practicality of moral judgments combined with the objectivity of moral judgments justifies premise (2) that we expect rational agents to do what they are morally required to do.

*Approval/dissaproval requires expectations from the subject*. Another argument can be given for premise (2). The appropriateness of a range of moral attitudes requires premise (2) to be true and, therefore, also the the rationalist conceptual claim. We approve and disapprove of what people do when moral matters are at stake. But such attitudes presuppose an expectation that rational agents act rightly. Note that approval and disapproval differ remarkedly from liking and disliking something. There are no restrictions on liking or disliking something, but it seems that approval or disapproval require that the object of the (dis)approval take into account the attitude of the (dis)approver in forming their decisions, e.g. it makes sense for me to (dis)like your consumption of strawberry ice-cream with no restriction, but it only makes sense for me to (dis)approve of your consumption only if I'm evaluating your behavior against a standard which there is a legitimate expectation that you will consider. Therefore, approval and disapproval only exist when there are grounds for legitimate expectations for someone else's behavior. Because we (dis)approve of rational agents insofar as they behave (im)morally, we have legitimate expectations that rational agents behave morally. What grounds these legitimate expectations must be that we conceive of moral requirements as requirements of rationality.

## Humean Theory of Motivation

There are two forms of principles that characterize the Humean theory of motivation, a weaker and a stronger principle.

- Strong principle: R at t constitutes a motivating reason of agent A to X iff there is some G such that R at t consists of an appropriately related desire of A to G and a belief that were she to X she would G. In other words, a motivating reason to do X consists of a desire-belief pair such that the agent believes that doing X would satisfy the desire.
- Weak principle: Agent A at t has a motivating reason to X only if there is some G such that, at t, A desires to G and believes that were she to X she would G. In other words, a motivating reason to X exists only if there exists a desire-belief pair such that the agent believes that doing X would satisfy the desire.  

The weaker principle represents an *existence* criterion, whereas the stronger principle represents a *constitution* criterion. The weaker principle merely states that all motivating reasons *require* an appropriate desire-belief; the stronger principle states that all motivating reasons are *constituted* by an appropriate desire-belief pair. All anti-Humeans are united against the stronger principle.

The distinction between motivating reasons and normative reasons should be noted. The concept of a reason for action is loosely defined by two dimensions of explanation and justification. A motivating reason emphasizes the explanatory dimension, whereas a normative reason emphasizes the justificatory dimension. Both kinds of reasons are similar in that they render an agent's action intelligible. To say that someone has normative reason to do X is to utter a *truth* stating that her X-ing is justified from the perspective of the normative system (i.e. from rationality, prudence, morality, etc.) that generates the requirement. To say that someone has a motivating reason to X is to describe a *psychological state* which is explanatory of her X-ing, other things being equal.

One can have a normative reason to X without a motivating reason to X. Likewise, one can have a motivating reason to X without a normative reason to X. Both cases can be due to ignorance or irrationality.

### Desires as dispositions

*Phenomenlogical Conception*. According to Hume, desire are a certain kind of feeling, an emotion that we are directly aware of which is phenomenologically salient. This would be a strong phenomenlogical conception of desires, where desires are sensations with a certain phenomenological content. The problem with this conception is that it is incompatible with a plausible epistemology of desire. According to this conception, just as a subject is in pain if and only if he believes he is in pain, a subject desires to X if and only if he believes that he desires X. There are two problems with this conception:

1. People can be fallible about their desires. Firstly, an agent desires something without believing that they do, e.g. children who lash out or cry for seemingly no reason and then calm down when they recieve attention. Secondly, an agent can falsy believe that they desire something, e.g. someone who believes they fundamentally desire to have a certain brand of brand of clothing, when its actually a derivative desire that derives from a fundamental desire for social acceptance and an implicit association between the brand with social acceptance.
2. Desires have propositional content whereas sensations do not. Ascriptions of desires may be given in the form 'A desires p' where 'p' is a proposition. Ascriptions of sensations do not have this constraint.

*World-to-mind fit*. An superior alternative conception of desire can be given based on focusing on its direction of fit. There are two directions of fit of mental states with the world. Beliefs are a kind of mind-to-world fit state of mind; they aim at truth and their being true is their fitting with the world. Desires are a kind of world-to-mind fit state of mind. They aim at realization and their realization is the world fitting with them. Whereas a belief that p tends to vanish upon perceiving that not-p, a desire to p tends to persist upon perceiving that not-p.

*Dispositional Conception*. More precisely, desires are states with a functional, dispositional role. To desire to G is to be disposed to X in conditions where they believe they can G by X-ing.

### Desires as Motivating Reasons

The following argument can be given to show that motivating reasons are constituted by, among other things, desires.

1. Having a motivating reasons is having a goal.
2. Having a goal is a world-to-mind fit.
3. Having a world-to-mind fit is a desire.
4. Therefore, motivating reasons are constituted by desires.

(1) cannot be reasonably rejected because reasons as explanations are teological explanations. The *function* of a motivating reason is to motivate someone *towards* some state, which can be characterized as a goal. (2) cannot be rejected because a goal to p is not automatically dismissed upon perceiving that p is not true, so it cannot be a mind-to-world fit. (3) might be rejected for two different reasons.

1. The first objection states that desires are not the only world-to-fit state of mind. This objection can be dismissed by broadening the concept of desire to include all world-to-mind states of mind. This would not change the spirit of the Humean Theory of Motivation.
2. The second objection states that there can be a state with both directions of fit, e.g. a *besire*. But this doesn't work when considering what happens when one besires that p and perceives that not-p. If this tends to cause the besire to vanish, then the besire can't be a world-to-mind fit, but if this allows the besire to persist, then the besire can't be a mind-to-world fit. It might be objected that the attitude has two directions of fit but at different content. But this implies that there can be cases where someone has a besire and the desire and belief can never be pulled apart. This seems implausible, for it seems possible that one can have besire at one time and then have their motivation sapped later without losing their initial belief.

## Anti-Humean Theory of Normative Reasons

Hume believed that whereas our beliefs can be assessed in terms of truth or falsehood, and so could be rationally assessed baed on their truth, our desires could not be assessed in those terms. Therefore, desires are beyond rational criticism. What it is rational for an agent to do is to simply maximize his present desires. This section rejects the Humean theory of normative reasons in favor of an anti-Humean theory.

### Valuing

*Deliberative and inentional*. Intentional action can be explained from two perspectives, the *intentional* and the *deliberative*. From the intentional perspective, intentional action can be explained by citiing *motivating reasons*, i.e. by citing a belief-desire pair that fits into a pattern of teleological explanation. From the deliberative perspective, intentional action can be explained by citing *normative reasons*, i.e. by citing a pattern of rational deliberation that either did, or could have, produced it. This involves citing the considerations that one reflects over in deciding what to do. 

*Connection between normative and motivational*. The deliberative perspective must be explanatory because when we decide what to do after deliberation, that often makes a difference in what we do. This would be impossible if the deliberative perspective were not explanatory, since the connection between deliberation and our action would be purely causally contingent. Thus, our attitudes, call them *values*, towards the propositions that figure in our deliberations must be capable of figuring an explanation of our action. This introduces a conflict, for it must be explained how deliberative explanation in terms of *valuing* and believing relates to the intentional explanation in terms of *desiring* and believing.

*Disconnect between normative and motivational.* We must think there is some connection bewteen desires and values because, again, values in deliberation must be capable of explanation and the only explanation of action must be desires. However, there must also be some slack between desires and values. An agent may desire to X without valuing to X (e.g. kleptomaniac, addicts, etc.). Likewise, an agent may value X without desiring to X (e.g. the depressed, weakness of will). In general, due to psychological compulsions, physical addictions, emotional disturbances, etc. there is an imperfect connection between what an agent judges to be a normative reasons for action (i.e. what they value) and the agent's motivating reasons for action (i.e. what they desire). The puzzle is to explain the psychology of valuing that can respect these plattitudes. It would seem that conceptualizing valuing as a belief cannot explain how normative reasons can be motivating, but it also seems that conceptualizing valuing as a desire cannot explain how one's values conflict with their desires.

### Valuing as Desiring

*Plain Desires*. The simplest explanation would be to say that valuing simply is desiring. Judging something valuable is to desire it. In other words, when one expresses that they have normative reason to X (e.g. that they value X), they are merely expressing a desire. The problem with this is it doesn't allow for the cases where desire and valuing come apart (e.g. cases of weakness of will, depression, addiction, etc.), where someone has no desire corresponding to their values, or vice-versa.

*Mode of desiring*. Another explanation states that valuing is a mode of desiring. An agent values X if and only if she desires X after certain tests of reflection and experience, without interference from psychological compulsion, addictions, depressions, emotional distress, etc. Valuing is a kind of reflectively endorsed, informed desire in a psychologically sound state of mind. This may be sufficient to explain how we can desire something without valuing it (e.g. if we desired it in the inappropriate state of mind), but it would do nothing to show how we could value something without desiring it. 

*Higher order desire*. Finally, one might say that valuing can be reduced to a desire for a desire. This conception satisfies the earlier requirements for a conception of values. It can explain how someone can desire X without valuing X (for one can desire X without having a higher-order desire in favor of that desire), and it can explain how one can value X without desiring X (for one can desire to desire X without actually desiring X). However, there are two separate problems with this:

But first, note one constraint on a conception of normative reasons: 

> C1: if A judges that he has normative reason to X, then he rationally should desire to X.

1. The reduction of valuing to desiring to desire cannot meet C1. If an agent has a conflicting second-order and first-order desire, it is equally rational for him to abandon either desire. In fact, on Hume's conception of rationality, he should mantain whichever desire is the strongest, which could be the first-order desire. One could object and state that instead of appealing solely to the *strength* of a desire as suggested by Hume, we also appeal to its *content*; it is rational to favor a second-order desire over a first-order desire, regardless of strength. But there are no independent arguments in favor of this conception of the rationality of desire; this is an ad-hoc rationalization to reconcile this theory of value with the constraint on normative reasons.
2. There is no reason to identify valuing with second-order desires as opposed to third- or fourth-order desires. There is no non-arbitrary reason to identify valuing with any particular level of desiring. Each level of desiring seems as plausible as the other, which means all identifications are equally implausible.

### Valuing as Believing

The question is how to conceptualize valuing as believing in a way that meets the defeasible connection between valuing and desiring mentioned above, and in a way that meets constraint C1. Re-articulated in the form of a belief, C1 can be expressed as C2

> C2: if A believes that he has normative reason to X, then he rationally should desire to X.

This can be met with an analysis based on the following plattitude: what we have normative reason to do is what we would desire that we do if we were fully rational. This can be transformed into a complete analysis as follows: 

> for A to judge that he has normative reason to do X in circumstances C is for A to judge that a fully rational version of himself, A+, would desire A to X in C.

#### The Role of Introspection

This does not reduce value judgments to introspective judgments about our desires. Values judgments are the product of rational deliberation. An agent's desires may figure in this deliberative process as the *objects* of evaluation. However, the actual value judgments concern what an full rational version of the agent would desire. This is not an *instrospective* fact about the agent, but rather a *hypothetical* fact about the agent against which one's desirs can be evaluated. While introspection may provide a useful means to learn about what one would hypothetically desire, one's hypothetical desires are not constituted by or reduced to introspective facts about the agent.

#### Normative/Motivational disconnect

This analysis can clearly account for cases where one's judged normative reasons diverge from their motivating reasons. For, what an agent believes about her hypothetical desires is rather disassociated from her actual desires. One's desires are irrational to the extent that they are wholly or solely the product of psychological compulsions, physical addictions, emotional disturbances, etc., to the extent that they wouldn't be had if it weren't for those conditions. These conditions, however, would be imagined away as one imagines the psychology of their fully informed self, because these features have no constitutive role to play in the psychology of a fully rational agent. 

#### Fully Rational

Some of the plattitudes concerning full rationality include the following (as given by Bernard William's explicit analysis of rationality): 

- The agent holds no false beliefs.
- The agent holds all relevant true beliefs, etc. for example. 
- The agent deliberates correctly.

The features of correct deliberation may be a substantive question. But some possibilities include the following: 

- Means-end deliberation (the generation of a desire to X as a result of combining a desire to Y and a belief that doing X does Y).
- Deciding how the satisfaction of one's desire can be satisfied. 
- Deciding which desire one attaches most weight to.
- Using vivid imagination (in place of belief) to determine how a desire could be satisfied, or what it might be like. 
- Deliberation free of psychological compulsions, physical addictions, emotional disturbances, etc.
- Systematically justifying one's desires. Just as unity is partially constitutive of having a rationally justified set of beliefs, so to unity is partially constitutive of having a rationally justified set of desires. It is rationally preferrable to have desires that do not conflcit. Further, it is rationally preferrable to have one's desires explained and guided by general principles rather than a batch of unrelated desires. The belief that adopting/abandoning certain desires leads to a more unified set of desires would motivate a rational to make that change, insofar as they are rational. 

Some of these procedures, e.g. imagination, systematic justification, etc., can be used to create and destroy underived desires.

#### Summary-style and non-reductive 

This analysis gives a summary-style (rather than explicit) notion of being fully rational. This is to capture a host of specific platitudes about practical rationality (some of the plattitudes were given above). It is also non-reductive because describing what it is to be fully rational required the use of normative concepts (the notion of a set of attitudes being "unified" is a normative concept). It's not clear whether normative concepts are vulnerable to a permutation problem, but it seems that they probably are because (1) much of our normative concepts are interdefined are a learned via paradigmatic cases rather than via non-normative concepts, and (2) all historical analyses of normative concepts into non-normative concepts have been spectacular failures. Regardless, being reductive and explicit is not a necessary requirement of an adequate analysis.

#### Non-relative conception of normative reasons

There is a certain sort of relativity in our concept of normative reasons, in the sense that the normative reasons an agent has, i.e. what she would have if she were fully rational, are a functions from her actual desires. The relevant functions are given by the standards of correct deliberation given above. It might be the case that this leads to reasons prescribing different behaviors for different agents. However, this doesn't preclude the possibility of a non-relative cooncept of normative reasons. The differences in desires of different fully rational agents could be due to different *circumstances* rather than different *reasons*. What's required for a non-relative concept of reasons is that fully rational agents converge in their hypothetical desires about what is to be done in various circumstances that they might find themselves. For example, a non-relative concept of normative reasons is compatible with saying that A has normative reason to X in circumstances C1 whereas B has normative reason to Y in circumstances C2, so long as both A and B have reason to X in C1 and Y in C2. 

This also shows that normative reasons are categorical reasons rather than hypothetical, because they are not functions of our *actual* desires; they are functions of the hypothetical, ideal desires we would have. And, given that this is a non-relative conception of normative reasons, one's actual desires should have no special significance of one's reasons. 

This is a conceptual claim, not a substantial one; it says nothing about whether there are any such reasons. This can be discovered only by engaging in moral argument and observing the effects.

#### The deliberative and intentional perspective

This explains the apparent conflict in the deliberative and intentional perspectives on explanations of action. All intentional actions are explicable from the intentional perspective in terms of our desires and beliefs. However, to the extent that we are rational, our desires are themselves sensitive to our beliefs about our reasons. Just as rational agents tend to desire the what they judge to be means to an end that they desire, so too do rational agents tend to desire what they judge it rational to desire, i.e. what they believe they would desire if they were rational. Thus, intentional actions are also explicable from the deliberative perspective, insofar as the desires responsible for intentional actions are modified by our normative beliefs. This explains why between normative reasons and motivating reasons are connected but not perfect, for our tendency to be rational (specifically, our tendency to modify our desires in accordance with our normative judgments) is itself imperfect.

## Solution to the Moral Problem