# Libertarianism

## The Diversity of Right-Wing Political Theory

## The Self-Ownership Argument

There are important continuities here between Nozick and Rawls, not only in Nozick's appeal to the abstract principle of equality, but also in his more specific arguments against utilitarianism. It was an important part of Rawls's argument that utilitarianism fails to treat people as ends in themselves, since it allows some people to be sacrificed endlessly for the greater benefit of others. So both Rawls and Nozick agree that treating people as equals requires limits on the ways that one person can be used for the benefit of others, or for the benefit of society generally. Individuals have rights which a just society will respect, rights which are not subject to, or the product of, utilitarian calculations.

According to Nozick, Rawls's demand that goods produced by the talented be used to improve the well-being of the disadvantaged is incompatible with recognizing self-ownership. If I own my self, then I own my talents. And if I own my talents, then I own whatever I produce with my self-owned talents. Just as owning a piece of land means that I own what is produced by the land, so owning my talents means that I own what is produced by my talents. Hence the demand for redistributive taxation from the talented to the disadvantaged violates self-ownership.

Nozick's argument can be summarized as two claims:

1. Rawlsian redistribution (or other coercive government interventions in market exchanges) is incompatible with recognizing people as self-owners. Only unrestricted capitalism recognizes self-ownership.
2. Recognizing people as self-owners is crucial to treating people as equals.

### Self-ownership and property-ownership

How does self-ownership yield property-ownership? Nozick claims that market exchanges involve the exercise of individuals' powers, and since individuals own their powers, they also own whatever comes from the exercise of those powers in the marketplace.

Nozick recognizes that market transactions involve more than the exercise of self-owned powers. In his theory, my title to external goods like land comes from the fact that others have transferred the title to me, in accordance with the principle of transfer. This assumes, ofcourse, that the earlier owner had legitimate title, and so on.

The beginning of the series of transfers is not when the land was created, but rather when it was first appropriated by an individual as her private property. On Nozick's theory, we must go down the chain of transfers to see if the initial acquisition was legitimate.

**Initial Acquisition**

The historical answer is often that natural resources came to be someone's property by force. The use of force makes acquisition illegitimate, so current title is illegitimate. Hence those who currently possess scarce resources have no right to deprive others of access to them-e.g. capitalists are not entitled to deprive workers of access to the products or profits of the existing means of production. Ideally, the effects of the illegitimate acquisition should be rectified, and the resources restored to their rightful owner. However, it is often impossible to know who the rightful owners are-we do not know from whom the resources were illegitimately taken. Nozick suggests that we could rectify the illegitimacy of existing title by a one-time general redistribution of resources in accordance with Rawls's difference principle.

What sort of initial acquisition of absolute rights over unowned resources is consistent with the idea of treating people as equals? Nozick draws on John Locke's answer to it. Locke's answer, or at any rate one of his answers, was that we are entitled to appropriate bits of the external world if we leave 'enough and as good' for others. An act of appropriation that meets this criterion is consistent with the equality of other individuals since they are not disadvantaged by that appropriation. Locke says that appropriation is acceptable if it leaves people as well or better off overall. And he believed that enclosing the commons would indeed make everyone better off overall, even those left without any land available to them.

Part of the reason for this lies in the 'tragedy of the commons'. When land is held in common for general use, there is little incentive for any particular person to invest their time and effort in developing the land to improve its productivity. It is only rational to invest in improving the land if I can exclude those free-riders who would reap the rewards without contributing to the labour. But this requires taking the land out of the com- mons, and assigning someone control over it including the right to exclude others from accessing or benefiting from it-i.e. it requires giving someone property rights over the land. Enclosing the commons is needed to avoid ruin, and to promote productive investments in the land. And if we do allow enclosure, we can safely predict that even those who are left without land will actually be better off than before. The propertyless have lost access to land, but have gained access to more of the goods that they used to get from that land.

**The Lockean Proviso**

Nozick's account of fair initial acquisition can be summarized as follows:

1. People own themselves.
2. The world is initially unowned.
3. You can acquire absolute rights over a disproportionate share of the world, if you do not worsen the condition of others.
4. It is relatively easy to acquire absolute rights over a disproportionate share of the world.
5. Once people have appropriated private property, a free market in capital and labour is morally required.

I will concentrate on Nozick's interpretation of (3), his account of what it is to worsen the conditions of others. His account has two relevant features: (a) it defines "worse off" in terms of material welfare; (b) it defines pre-appropriation common usage as the standard of comparison.

Imagine that Amy and Ben have a share of initially unowned land. Amy now appropriates so much of the land that Ben cannot live off the remaining land. Amy offers Ben a wage to work on her land which exceeds what he was originally producing on his own. Amy also gets more resources than she initially produced. Ben must accept this, since there is not enough land left for him to live as he used to. He needs access to the land that she appropriated, and she is able to dictate the terms of that access, so that he gets less than half of the benefits of the division of labour. Amy's act of appropriation satisfies Nozick's proviso, since the situation after her appropri- ation is better than general use in terms of material resources, for both Amy and Ben.

*Material Welfare.* The reason that Nozick emphasizes self-ownership is that we are separate individuals, each with our own life to live. Self-ownership protects our ability to pursue our own goals, our 'conceptions of ourselves', since it allows us to resist attempts by others to use us merely as means to their ends. He claims that a concern for people's freedom to lead their own lives underlies his theory of unrestricted property rights. Thus, one would expect Nozick to object to any appropriation that puts someone in an unnecessary and undesirable position of subordination and dependence on the will of others. But notice that the fact that Ben is now subject to Amy's decisions is not considered by Nozick in assessing the fairness of the appropriation. E.g. Ben has no say over how his labour will be expended. He must accept Amy's conditions of employment, since he will die otherwise, and so he must relinquish control over how he spends much of his time. Shouldn't Nozick consider these effects, on his own account of why self-ownership is important? 

*Arbitrary Narrowing of the Options.* Nozick's proviso says that an act of appropriation must not make others worse off than they were when the land was in common use. But this ignores many relevant alternatives. Nozick is, in effect, accepting a first-come, first-served doctrine of appropriation. But why should we accept this as a fair procedure for appropriation, rather than, for example, a system which equalizes chances for appropriation? Should the most important value-our ability to lead our own lives-be dependent on the arbitrariness of a first-come, first-served doctrine? What if Ben could organize an even greater increase in productivity? What if Amy and Ben appropriate the land collectively, exercising ownership rights jointly, and dividing the labour consensually? Capitalism passes this test of not worsening people compared to their fate in the commons (Nozick 1974: 177). However, given the tragedy of the commons, virtually any system of property-ownership would pass this test, including state ownership, worker self-ownership, kibbutz-like communal ownership. All of these property regimes grant some set of people sufficient control over resources to ensure that free-riders are excluded, and hence provide incentives to develop resources and to avoid depleting them. So the mere fact that capitalism does better than the commons is not saying much, and is not a reason to prefer it over any other system for establishing property rights.

*Initial Ownership of the World.* The problem with (3) has already been demonstrated. But there is a another problem with (2). Why accept that the world is initially unowned? Why not suppose that the world is jointly owned, such that each person has an equal veto over the disposal of the land (Exdell I977: 146-9; Cohen 1986b: 80-7)? Nozick never considers this option, but others, including some libertarians, claim that it is the most defensible account of world-ownership. Or we could think of that the world as divided equally amongst all the members of the human community. All of these accounts of the moral status of the external world are compat- ible with the principle of self-ownership, since self-ownership says nothing about what kind of ownership we have over external resources.

### Self-ownership and equality

Distinguish between formal self-ownership and substantive self-ownership. A substantive conception of self-ownership focuses on self-determination. Substantive self-ownership is the idea that in the central areas of one's life, in our most important projects, we should be free to act on our own conceptions of the good. Respecting self-determination is an important part of treating people as ends not means, as distinct individuals each with their own life to lead. Formal conception of self-ownership deals with legal rights over one's physical being.

**Why Capitalism?**

Nozick believes that self-ownership inevitably leads to unrestricted property rights, but we are in fact confronted by a variety of economic regimes that are compatible with self-ownership, depending on our theory oflegitimate appropriation, and our assumptions about the status of the external world. Is there any reason for self-owners to prefer libertarian regimes over liberal egalitarian ones? There are three possible reasons: One concerns consent, the second concerns self-determination, the third concerns dignity. Consent does not matter to Nozick (it doesn't matter whether Ben consents to a distribution). Also, dignity is predicated on other moral beliefs. We only feel something to be an attack on our dignity if we are already convinced that it is wrong. So that leaves self-determination.

Instead, Nozick might claim that the assumptions which lead to liberal results, while formally compatible with self-ownership, in fact undermine the value of self-ownership. E.g. under joint ownership of all resources, we need permission before using any resources. Thus, how can we be said to own ourselves when we need permission to do anything? Their legal rights of self-ownership are therefore purely formal, since they require each other's permission whenever they wish to use resources in the pursuit of their goals. We should select a regime that contains more substantive self-ownership. 

The problem is that in a libertarian regime not everyone can parlay their formal self-ownership into substantive self-determination. Nozick explicitly says that formal self-ownership is all that people can legitimately claim. He says that the worker who lacks any property, and who must sell her labour on adverse terms to the capitalist, has 'full' self-ownership (Nozick 1974: 262-4). She has full self-ownership even though, Nozick concedes, she may be forced to agree to whatever terms the capitalist is offering her in order to survive. Those who enter the market after others have appropriated all the available property are 'limited to gifts and jobs others are willing to bestow on them', and so 'if they are compelled to cooperate in the scheme of holdings, they are forced to benefit others.

Self-determination requires resources as well as rights over one's physical being. We are only able to pursue our most important projects, free from the demands of others, if we are not forced by economic necessity to accept whatever conditions others impose on us in return for access to needed resources. Since meaningful self-determination requires both resources and liberties, and since each of us has a separate existence, each person should have an equal claim to these resources and liberties. But, if so, then the concern for self-determination leads us towards liberal regimes, not libertarian ones. While redistributive programmes do restrict the self-determination of the well-off to a limited degree, they also give real control over their lives to people who previously lacked it. Liberal redistribution doesn't sacrifice self-determination for some other goal. Rather, it aims at a fairer distribution of the means required for self-determination. Libertarianism, by contrast, allows undeserved inequalities in that distribution.

**Why care about formal self-ownership?**

If we contrast formal self-ownership and self-determination, surely substantive self-determination is more fundamental. We do not endorse self-determination because it promotes formal self-ownership. Rather, we will endorse formal self-ownership in so far as it promotes self-determination. So why not just start with self-determination as our preferred conception of treating people as equals? It may be that the best regime, assessed in terms of self- determination, not only goes beyond formal self-ownership, but also limits it. In that case, formal self-ownership should give way to the substantive self-determination that really matters to us (Cohen 1986b: 86; Kernohan 1990).

Nozick's emphasis on the idea of formal self-ownership may also be due to the undifferentiated nature of that concept. The idea of self-ownership misleadingly suggests that we either have or lack self-ownership, as if the various rights and powers which constitute self-ownership must be accepted or rejected as a package. But in reality there is a range of options, involving different kinds of control over one's choices and one's circumstances. We need to distinguish different elements involved in controlling one's self, and see how they relate to the different elements involved in controlling external resources. We should consider each of these rights and powers on its own terms, to see in what ways it promotes each person's essential interests. Which combination of rights and resources contributes to each person's ability to act on their goals and projects, their conception of themselves? The best mix will involve more than formal self-ownership (e.g. access to resources), but it may also involve less, for it may be worth giving up some formal self-ownership for the sake of substantive self-determination.

## Libertarianism as Mutual Advantage

## Libertarianism as Liberty

## The Politics of Libertarianism

## Further Reading

The proviso requires a middle ground. It is difficult to say what that middle ground is, or how different it would be from the principles of Rawls and Dworkin. John Arthur argues that the appropriate test is an egalitarian one-appropriation worsens someone's con- dition if, as a result, they get less than an equal share of the value of the world's natural resources. This is the only decision that makes sense, he argues, 'in light of the fact that [each person] is as entitled to the resources as anyone else. He wasn't born deserving a smaller share of the earth's wealth, nor is anybody else naturally entitled to a larger than average share' (Arthur 1987: 344; cf. Steiner 1977: 49). Cohen argues that Rawls's difference principle might pro- vide a fair standard of legitimate appropriation (Cohen 1986a: 133-4). Van Parijs argues that appropriators should be required to fund a basic income scheme as a condition of legitimate appropriation, as compensation for those who are left propertyless (Van Parijs 1992: 9-11).