Like most libertarian philosophers, I believe that we have strong moral duties not to violate the ownership rights of other persons. These ownership rights, I believe, constrain the morally permissible acts of both private individuals and of the state. Almost all libertarians accept that people own their bodies (i.e. they affirm the self-ownership thesis), but there is widespread disagreement about the ownership of entities other than one's body (I give my opinion on extrapersonal ownership below).

## Self-ownership

Most libertarians, myself included, ground their theory in *self-ownership* (some libertarians attempt to ground their theory in something like the *non-aggression principle*, but there are many serious problems with this kind of view as [Zwolinski (2016)](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2772753) has described). In this section, I will describe the nature of self-ownership and explain why it is not a mysterious or implausible concept. To show that self-ownership is not mysterious, I will describe the nature of moral rights and enumerate some of the rights associated with self-ownership. To show that self-ownership is not implausible, I will show how self-ownership can explain many of the rights that the vast majority of people accept, including socialists.

### Ownership

When libertarians speak of "ownership", they are not speaking about what people *legally* own. Libertarianism is not a legal theory. Some people might take this to be metaphysically mysterious. After all, what does it mean to say that someone *owns* an entity above and beyond what the law indicates? It might seem that the rejection of a *legal* sense of ownership commits one to a queer and implausible *metaphysical* sense of ownership, based on some weird metaphysical relation between a person and the entity that they own. But libertarianism is not committed to such metaphysical claims about ownership. Libertarianism is only committed to *normative* claims about ownership. When libertarians claim that a person owns an entity, this only necessitates a *normative* relation between the person and the entity. The normative relation is that the person has a "bundle of particular rights" associated with the entity. [Vallentyne et al (2005)](https://personal.lse.ac.uk/OTSUKAM/leftlibP&PA.pdf) (page 204) described the "bundle of rights" associated with ownership as follows:

> Full private ownership of an object consists of a full set of the following ownership rights: (1) control rights over the use of the object; (2) rights to compensation if someone uses the object without one’s permission; (3) enforcement rights (to prevent the violation of these rights or to extract compensation owed for past violation); (4) rights to transfer these rights to others (by sale, rental, gift, or loan); and (5) immunity to the nonconsensual loss of any of the rights of ownership.

What was said about "ownership" above can also be said about "rights" here. Rights should not be understood as *legal* rights. Libertarianism is not concerned with interpreting legal rights. Libertarianism is concerned with *moral* rights. Just like with the idea of "ownership", some might object to the idea of "moral rights" due to an assumption that the idea involves mysterious *metaphysical* claims about the existence of said rights. After all, there are no rights found in nature independent of human construction. But, also just like with "ownership", the invocation of moral rights does not commit one to any metaphysical claims. To say that a person has certain moral rights is merely to assert a set of moral claims. More specifically, to ascribe to a person has a certain moral right is to make claims about what they are morally permitted to do and what others are morally prohibited from doing. Surely, there is nothing metaphysical mysterious about saying that people are morally permitted to perform certain actions. Following the [SEP article on rights](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/rights/#AnalRigh), every right consists of some combination of some number of four basic components (which are called "Hohfeldian incidents"):

* Privileges (or liberties): _A_ has a privilege to φ _if and only if_  _A_ has no duty not to φ.
* Claims: _A_ has a claim that _B_ φ _if and only if_  _B_ has a duty to _A_ to φ.
* Powers: _A_ has a power _if and only if_  _A_ has the ability to alter her own or another’s Hohfeldian incidents.
* Immunities: _B_ has an immunity _if and only if_  _A_ lacks the ability to alter _B_’s Hohfeldian incidents.

For example, if you have the right to pick up a shell you find on the beach, this right would be a *privilege* (or liberty) to pick up the shell (i.e. you have no moral duty to not pick up the shell). If you have the right to privacy, then this right would be a *claim* on others (i.e. others have a moral duty to not intrude on your privacy). Some rights can be understood as either privileges or claims. For example, a right to food might be understood as a *privilege* to acquire food or a *claim* that others subsidize or refrain from interfering with one's acquisition of food. From my perspective, all moral rights involve *claims* (within the context of political philosophy), and I will be operating from this perspective for the rest of the post. For an example of a *power*, consider when someone sells a house. Initially, when the person owns the house, they have the privilege to use the house and they have a claim that others not use the house with their consent. However, they are also able to sell the house, which involves transfering these liberties and claims to someone else.

### Self-ownership

Now that we understood the nature of ownership, we can illuminate the nature of self-ownership. Recall from above that ownership of an entity merely consists of a "bundle of rights". *Self*-ownership, then merely consists of this "bundle of rights" applied to one's body. The [SEP entry on libertarianism](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/libertarianism/) described self-ownership as follows:

> Most [libertarians], however, focus more on the idea of self-ownership. Famously, this view is attributed to Robert Nozick (Cohen 1995; but see the discussion below). On this view, the key libertarian starting point is that people have a very stringent (perhaps the most stringent possible) set of rights over their persons, giving them the kind of control over themselves that one might have over possessions they own. This includes (1) rights to control the use of the entity: including a liberty-right to use it as well as a claim-right that others not use it without one's consent, (2) rights to transfer these rights to others (by sale, rental, gift, or loan), (3) immunities to the non-consensual loss of these rights, (4) compensation rights in case others use the entity without one’s consent, and (5) enforcement rights (e.g. rights to restrain persons about to violate these rights).

Self-ownership, therefore, explains many of the moral rights that we think many persons have. For example, some of the rights entailed from self-ownership include "liberty-right" to use one's body as well as a "claim-right" that others not use one's body without one's consent. This suggests some common moral rights that many take to be important, e.g. that people have liberty-rights to engage in whatever sexual practices they choose, and that people have claim-rights that others not use their body against their will for e.g. forced slavery. Other rights entailed from self-ownership include the right to transfer to others the liberty-rights and claim-rights to control one's body. This implies that one may, for example, sign a contract that modifies one's liberty-rights and claim-rights. For example, if one agrees to a (legitimate) contract that they will perform certain labor in exchange for money, then they will no longer have a liberty-right to refrain from performing the contracted labor, and they will no longer have a claim-right that others not punish them for refraining from performing the contracted labor.

### Self-ownership explains many of our strongest moral convictions

I believe that self-ownership explains many of our strongest moral convictions. This can be shown by considering cases where infringing on someone's bodily autonomy may be a useful means to benefit someone else. Such cases seem to be significant moral wrongs for they violate the rights associated with self-ownership. For example, [the majority of Americans](https://news.gallup.com/opinion/gallup/257627/alabama-bill-odds-public-consensus-abortion.aspx) (including most pro-lifers) believe that abortions should be legal in certain circumstances (e.g. in the case of rape or incest). For another example, consider [McFall v. Shimp](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/McFall_v._Shimp) which was an actual court case concerning whether the government could force David Shimp to perform a bone marrow transfusion to save his cousin's life. I think the vast majority of people would agree with the [court's decision](https://www.leagle.com/decision/197810010padampc3d90189) in this case which appealed to the fact that "one human being is under no legal compulsion to give aid or to take action to save another human being or to rescue." Our opinions in these cases are best explained by the fact that people have strong *claim-rights* that others not control their body without their consent. In other words, people *own* their bodies; each person gets to decide how to use their body. These views are all easily explained by invoking self-ownership.

The vast majority of people endorse many other ordinary freedoms that are best explained by invoking self-ownership. Consider freedom of religion, freedom of sexuality, freedom of occupation, freedom of speech, and freedom of movement, etc. An essential part of the justification of these freedoms involves the fact that people *own* their bodies, which gives them a moral right to decide how to use their bodies without being subject to the will of others (so long as they don't violate a like-right of others). These are freedoms that almost everyone accepts, which suggests that self-ownership may be an implicit commitment that everyone accepts. In fact, many philosophers claim that libertarianism is interchangeable with [classical liberalism](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/liberalism/). For example, [G.A. Cohen (1986)](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/social-philosophy-and-policy/article/selfownership-world-ownership-and-equality-part-ii/705C107C90B22CCF37234C4215AF395E) noted that "Liberalism, to idealize one of its traditional senses, may be defined as the thesis that each person has full private property in himself (and, consequently, no private property in anyone else). He may do what he likes with himself provided that he does not harm others" (page 79).  [Brennan et al. (2017)](https://www.routledgehandbooks.com/doi/10.4324/9781317486794.ch14) (page 209) has expressed a similar point: "Every liberal thinks we each have strong rights to freely use our persons and to exclude others from them. Every liberal thinks that a woman has the right to say no to a demand for sex, on the grounds that it’s her body. In this sense, then, all liberals accept some version of a self-ownership thesis, though many of them would not describe their beliefs as such...What liberals—both left liberals and libertarians— disagree about is how people own themselves, not that they own themselves."

Even many socialists implicitly appeal to self-ownership in their criticisms of capitalism. For example, many socialist critiques of capitalism posit that capitalism enables the exploitation of workers because it creates a system where workers are compelled to transfer surplus labor to capitalists on pain of severe poverty. There a few different socialist accounts of why such a system is exploitative. On [one account](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/socialism/#Expl), what makes this system exploitative is the fact that "that workers are entitled to the product of their labor, and that capitalists wrongly deprive them of it." However, this is committed to the claim that workers *own* the product of their labor (in the sense that workers have a liberty-right to use the products of their labor as they please, they have a claim-right against others using these products without the workers' consent, etc.). It seems that if workers own the product of their labor, then they must also own themselves (after all, if a person doesn't own themselves, why would they own thier labor?). The [SEP article](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/exploitation/#MarxTheoExpl) on exploitation notes that a similar point is raised by G.A. Cohen in his critique of Marx's account of exploitation: "for Cohen, however, the fact that Marx’s account of exploitation appears to be committed to the libertarian idea of that workers own their labor and the products they produce with that labor—that is, to the libertarian idea of self-ownership—is deeply problematic." So it seems that even socialists (at least the socialists that invoke an account of exploitation described here) are implicitly committed to some form of self-ownership.

## World-ownership

Libertarians who accept self-ownership usually do not believe that people *merely* own themselves. Rather, people also own (or are entitled to own) other resources in the world. Most libertarians, including myself, accept *private* property, which are resources owned by private individuals who wide liberty in determining how the resources is to be controlled. I outline my theory of private property in the next section. I believe that we should have a strong *presumption* towards treating resources as private property. However, sometimes it is not feasible to privatize certain resources. When this happens, such resources should be treated as *common* property. I will consider common property after describing my view on private property.

### Private property

There is a spectrum of libertarian views on private property, ranging from far-right to far-left depending on the degree to which the theory imposes an egalitarian constraint on the ownership of natural resources. [Peter Vallentyne (2009)](https://klinechair.missouri.edu/docs/left_libertarianism_and_liberty.pdf) gives examples of libertarian theories with different stances on private property:

* *Radical right-libertarianism* holds "that that there are no constraints on the ownership of natural resources". This view permits agents to own an unlimited amount of natural resources (page 18). Most libertarians reject this view because it permits a privileged group of individuals to own all valuable resources, which would result in everyone else being morally forbidden from leading their own lives without being subject to the will of others. Non-property owners would be at the mercy of the privileged property owners to acquire basic external resources necessary to lead their own life.
* *Radical joint-ownership left-libertarianism* holds that "individuals may use natural resources only with the collective (e.g., majority or unanimous) consent of the members of society" (page 17). Most libertarians reject this view because, just like with radical right-libertarianism, it also leaves individuals without the ability to lead their own lives without being subject to the will of others.
* Instead, most libertarian theories fall between these two radical extremes. Libertarians tend to radical right-libertarianism and instead adopt the [*Lockean proviso*](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/libertarianism/#LeftRight), which permits the ownership of natural resources only if "enough and as good" is left for others. Also, libertarians tend to reject radical left-libertarianism and instead accept *unilateralist* theories which "under a broad range of circumstances (although perhaps subject to various conditions), (1) agents are initially permitted to use natural resources without anyone’s consent, and (2) agent initially have the power to appropriate (acquire rights over) natural resources without anyone’s consent" (page 18).

Libertarian views that are both *unilateralist* and subject to the *Lockean proviso* can be referred to as the  *Lockean libertarianism.* Vallentyne describes Lockean Libertarianism as follows (page 20): 

> Let us now consider *Lockean libertarianism*, which allows unilateral use and appropriation but requires that some version of the Lockean proviso be satisfied. It views natural resources as initially unprotected by any property rule (no consent is needed for use or appropriation) but as protected by a compensation liability rule. Those who use natural resources, or claim rights over them, owe compensation to others for any costs imposed but such use or appropriation.

Various theories of Lockean libertarianism differ according to how they interpret the Lockean proviso, i.e. according to how they interpret "enough and as good." Vallentyne (pages 20-22) gives example of some forms of Lockean libertarianism:

* *Nozickean right-libertarianism* interprets the proviso to require that no one can be made worse off as a result of use or appropriation, compared with a baseline of non-use or non-appropriation. 
* *Sufficientarian libertarianism* interprets the Lockean proviso as requiring something like a sufficientarian requirement, such that people must have access to an adequate share of natural resources.
* *Equal share left-libertarianism*: interprets the Lockean proviso as requiring equally valuable shares of natural resources for everyone.
* *Equal opportunity left-libertarianism*: interprets the Lockean proviso as requiring compensation for disadvantages that result from different natural abilities (such as the effects of genetic differences).

I do not have strong confidence in any particular theory of resource ownership, but I lean towards something like equal-share left-libertarianism. Specifically, it seems to me that everyone is entitled to opportunity to an equally valuable share of natural resources, where "valuable" is measured in terms of economic value (e.g. to ascribe to Adam the opportunity to own more valuable natural resources than Bob else seems to unjustly *constrain* Bob's liberty as a means to promote Adam's liberty). The reason that opportunity to *natural* resources specifically ought to be distributed in this *egalitarian* manner is that no person has any special moral entitlement to any specific natural resource (natural resources can be considered "manna from heaven"). In contrast, people *do* have special moral entitlements to their own bodies and the products of their labor. So, while *natural* resources ought to be distributed in an egalitarian manner, other resources  - i.e. bodies and the products of labor - may be distributed in a deeply *inegalitarian* manner because some people have more valuable bodies and labor than others (e.g. some people are smarter, stronger, healthier, etc.). 

As stated eariler, *equal share left-libertarianism* posits that everyone is entitled to opportunity to an equally valuable share of natural resources. Let *equal economic value left-libertarianism* (my own personal terminology) refer to a version of this theory where "valuable" defined in terms of economic value (this is the position that I accept). Some people accept a version of this theory where "valuable" is defined in terms of the well-being that it produces for the owner of the resource. Call these theories *equal well-being left-libertarianism* (again, this is my own personal terminology). *Equal well-being left-libertarianism* theories permit giving more natural resources to individuals who are deficient in their ability to generate well-being from natural resources. In effect, this amounts to distributing more natural resources to such unfortunate individuals in order to correct for their deficiencies. These unfortunate individuals could be deficient in their ability to generate well-being either because (1) they are less able to produce economic value from a specified amount of natural resources (i.e. they are less economically productive), or (2) they receive less wellbeing from a specified amount of economic resources (e.g. because they are depressed). Possibly there are other sources of disadvantages, but these are the two possibilities I have in mind now. 

I reject this kind of *equal well-being left-libertarianism* in favor of *equal economic value left-libertarianism* because I don't believe people have rights that others compensate them for their low well-being. Justifying this position is beyond the scope of this post, but I will motivate my position by mentioning (what I believe to be) two clear cases where a person has no right that others compensate him for his low well-being: (1) cases where a person's low well-being is due to an *illegitimate* source (e.g. if one's well-being is lowered because he was disgusted as seeing a gay couple display affection), and (2) cases where a person is *responsible* for his low well-being (e.g. if someone is too lazy to generate economic success).

### Common Property

The view that I have described, *equal economic value left-libertarianism*, is only concerned with *private* property, i.e. property that is owned by a single individuals. As stated earlier, we ought to have a presumption toward treating resources as private property. However, sometimes it is infeasible to divide resources into privatized units in a fair manner (where "fair" is defined as I described above). When resources cannot be privatized, the resources should be treated as "common property". [Billy Christmas (2019)](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/economics-and-philosophy/article/ambidextrous-lockeanism/601F280B87EEB9E22F0255420BDBB5F4) describes two kinds of common property: (1) *collective property* refers to resources that are "privately owned by a group of persons" who have  "the right to exclude (almost) any use of the resource by non-members", and (2) *public property* refers to resources where people in general (not members of a particular group) have "the right to use the resource in a fairly narrow way" (page 12). Christmas gives a good example of a type of common property (page 14):

> Consider a large fishing pond. When an individual starts fishing, she acquires a right to the pond. No one may take the fish she catches, nor kick her off the embankment, nor engage in noise pollution that scares all the fish away, or water pollution that kills the fish, etc. An additional fisher would not necessarily interfere, however. Assuming the second fisher’s rate of capture did not come at the expense of that of the first fisher’s, then her fishing is non-interfering.

The pond in this example is considered common (rather than private) because the pond is more open to new users than private property, and is considered public (rather than collective) because the rights to use the pond are not limited to some special group. The reason the pond in this example may be public is that individuals may use the pond in certain ways that does not interfere with others using the pond in the same way. However, because the pond is finite, there is a limit to the number of people who can use the pond before the it is overcrowded. Once the pond is overcrowded, each individual user of the pond would interfere with existing users of the pond. Therefore, if the pond is at risk of overcrowding, this warrants treating the pond as *collective* (rather than *public*) property, i.e. this warrants a select group of individuals (e.g. perhaps only people that live around the pond) having the right to exclude other people from using the pond.

## Further questions regarding ownership rights

Even if we determine which persons own which entities, this is not sufficient to answer all questions regarding if and when we may intrude on the property and bodies of others. There are (at least) two reasons for this: (1) there is some indeterminacy with respect to the "bundle of rights" associated with ownership, so we need further argument to determine which specific set of rights are entailed from one's ownership of an entity; and (2) we need further argument to determine if it is ever permissible to violate someone's ownership rights (i.e. to determine if ownership rights are *defeasible*). In this section, I will attempt to address both of these tasks in turn. I will adopt what one libertarian philosopher calls the "elbow room" postulate as a guide for delineating ownership rights when they are indeterminate, and I will give some conditions for what are called "exception rights" which permit intruding on someone's property or body.

### Indeterminacy

There is some *indeterminacy* regarding the specific "bundle of rights" associated with ownership. This is because there are many different rights associated with ownership and these rights can sometimes conflict. [Vallentyne et al. (2005)](https://personal.lse.ac.uk/OTSUKAM/leftlibP&PA.pdf) (page 205) gives an example of some such indeterminacy regarding rights to enforcement, compensation, and immunity:

> Let us start by identifying the indeterminacy, which arises because there is no uniquely strongest set of ownership rights. This is so because strengthening one person’s compensation or enforcement rights weakens the immunity to loss of another person. Thus, there is no unique maximally strong set of ownership rights. Everyone could have very strong compensation and enforcement rights against those who violate their rights, but this would entail that everyone has a less than maximal immunity to loss of their ownership rights (since their liberty to use the things they own and the security against interference from others would be reduced when they violate the rights of others). Alternatively (to pick the other extreme), everyone could have very weak compensation and enforcement rights, while having a relatively strong immunity to loss. Neither set of rights is unequivocally stronger than the other.

So some of the indeterminacy stems from the conflict between enforcement, compensation, and immunity rights. There is (I believe) more serious indeterminacy that stems from an inherent conflict between liberty-rights and claim-rights. Liberty-rights provide *permissions* to do things, and claim-rights provide *prohibitions* (or *remove* permissions) on doing things. So when determining how to delineate rights, liberty-rights and claim-rights can come into conflict and we must make a decision on how to resolve the conflicts. For example, if maximized everyone's claim-rights at the expense of liberty-rights, this would prohibit others from imposing the most minor intrusions on anyone else's property (e.g. I would be prohibited from breathing because this might lead to air particles landing on your property). On the other hand, if we maximized everyone's liberty-rights at the expense of claim-rights, this would permit far too much (e.g. you would have no claim-right against me taking your property). 

We need a guide to determine how to delineate rights in cases of the indeterminacy described above. The ideal delineation of rights must involve some trade-off between liberty-rights and claim-rights. [Brennan and Vossen (2017)](https://www.routledgehandbooks.com/doi/10.4324/9781317486794.ch14) (page 209) discuss this trade-off in some more detail:

> More precisely, we can think of self-ownership as being made up of two variables. On the one hand, self-ownership offers protection (in the form of Hohfeldian claim-rights) against unwanted incursions on one’s person. On the other hand, self-ownership offers the freedom (in the form of Hohfeldian liberties) to use one’s person. Since liberties logically entail the absence of duties (including duties correlating to claim-rights), it follows that the two variables (internal to the idea of self-ownership) can be traded off against each other."

> The real question, then, is what mix of the two variables internal to the idea of self-ownership (the claim to exclude and the freedom to use) is morally most desirable. This should be obvious, of course. Bas is a self-owner with the freedom to use his person, but this does not license him to punch Jason in the face. Self-ownership is not best understood by completely maximizing on the freedom variable to the complete denial of the exclusion variable. And, again pace Sobel, self-ownership is also not best understood by maximizing on the exclusion variable to the complete denial of the freedom variable.

As a guide for determining how to delineate rights, I endorse using what [Eric Mack (2015)](https://docs.google.com/viewer?a=v&pid=sites&srcid=ZGVmYXVsdGRvbWFpbnxwcm9mZXNzb3JlcmljbWFja3xneDo5NDMzMGE1ODkxOTJiOWY) calls the "elbow room" postulate. Mack defines the postulate as a claim that (page 197) "a reasonable delineation of basic moral rights must be such that the claim-rights that are ascribed to individuals do not systematically preclude people from exercising the liberty-rights that the claim-rights are supposed to protect." He argues that a reasonable delineation of rights does not prohibit minor intrusions of someone's property "since the impermissibility of minor intrusions would be hog-tying." In other words, we ought not ascribe to individuals claim-rights so strong that they nullifies the liberty-rights that they were meant to protect. I consider this principle in more detail in a [separate post](https://reasonwithoutrestraint.com/delineating-libertarian-ownership-rights-the-anti-paralysis-postulate/).

### Defeasibility and exception rights

One question regarding ownership rights concerns whether such rights are *absolute.* I said earlier that to ascribe a moral right to a person is to, in part, impose *moral obligations* on others, e.g. if I have the right to eat what I choose, then others are morally obligated to refrain from forcing me to have a certain diet. If moral rights are *absolute*, then they would produce *conclusive* moral obligations, i.e. the obligations hold in all cases. But if moral rights are *deafisible*, then the they would merely produce what W.D. Ross calls "[*prima-facie* moral obligations](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/william-david-ross/#Rig)". If one has a prima-facie moral obligation to X, then this establishes that one has a obligation to X *unless* there is a special reason that [defeats](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/reasoning-defeasible/#DefeObli) the obligation in certain extenuating circumstances. In other words, a prima-facie obligation to X establishes a strong moral *presumption* to X. This is similar to the way “prima facie” is used [in legal contexts](https://dictionary.law.com/Default.aspx?selected=1598) where it refers to "a lawsuit or criminal prosecution in which the evidence before trial is _sufficient_ to prove the case unless there is substantial contradictory evidence presented at trial." In other words, while a prima-facie obligation *can* be defeated in special circumstances, it establishes a high *burden of proof* that must be met to jutsify violating the obligation. 

For an example of an ordinary prima-facie moral obligation, consider killing. Everyone agrees that we have a moral obligation to not kill others. However, there are clearly special circumstances where killing is permissible (e.g. killing in self-defense, killing to relieve someone of extreme suffering, killing in war, killing someone with their consent, killing as a means to save humanity from extermination, etc.). So how are we to understand the moral obligation against killing? One way to understand the obligation is to formulate it is as as a conclusive obligation that takes into account all of the exceptions, i.e. the prohibition on killing can be understood as the claim that "it is wrong to kill *unless it is done in self-defense, or to relieve someone of suffering, or to save humanity from extermination, etc.*" But this way of understanding the obligation on killing is implausible because there could be an unbounded number of exceptions and (I believe) we should never be confident that we have found all exceptions. Instead, the prohibition on killing should be understand as a *prima-facie* prohibition on killing, i.e. it is wrong to kill someone, aside from extenuating circumstances where special reasons can justify killing in such circumstances.

I believe that ownership rights are *prima-facie* rather than conclusive (I'm not convinced that there are *any* conclusive moral obligations). I believe that there can be extreme circumstances in which individuals are permitted to intrude on someone's body orproperty. For example, I believe such intrusions are permissible when the following conditions hold:

1. A disadvantaged person finds themselves in a perilous situation. For example, their life is in danger.
2. The disadvantaged person is in this situation through no fault of their own. For example, their life is in danger because a murderer is trying to kill them.
3. In order for the disadvantaged person to escape the perilous situation, it is necessary to intrude on someone else's body or property without their consent. For example, they can defend themselves from the murderer only by taking a stranger's axe (without their consnet) to kill the murderer.
4. The intrusion imposed is of a reasonable amount. For example, the owner of the axe does not need it for anything serious.

When these conditions are met, I believe it is morally permissible to intrude upon someone in a situation that would ordinarily be a rights violation. One example was given when listing out the conditions, e.g. it is permissible to take someone's axe without the owner's consent (assuming the owner does not need the axe for anything serious) to defend oneself from a murderer. For another example, I believe it is morally permissible to break a neighbor's fence to rescue a child drowning in their neighbor's pool. [Nicolás Maloberti (2017)](https://www.routledgehandbooks.com/doi/10.4324/9781317486794.ch11) referred to these rights as *exception rights*. I give more detail on the justification and implications of exception rights in a [separate post](https://reasonwithoutrestraint.com/justifying-the-state-on-libertarian-grounds/).

Other libertarians philosophers allow more room for possible defeaters to ownership rights. For example, left-libertarian Michael Otsuka has argued that rights infringements as *side-effects* may be more justifiable than infringements as *means* ([page 127](https://biblio.ugent.be/publication/8543979/file/8543981.pdf)). This would justify infringements by appeal to the [doctrine of double effect](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/double-effect/). Even right-libertarian [Robert Nozick](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/nozick-political/#AttRig) believed that we may be permitted to intrude upon someone's property in certain cases so long as the property owner is duly compensated. Further, in [Anarchy, State, and Utopia](https://spot.colorado.edu/~heathwoo/readings/nozick.pdf), Nozick considers the question of whether moral rights are absolute or whether they may be violated to avoid "catastrophic moral horror" (footnote of page 30). While he doesn't explicitly endorse violating rights in such cases, he also doesn't explicitly reject rights violations in such cases, suggesting that he may be at least open to exceptional cases where rights violations are permitted.

I find both Otsuka's and Nozick's positions fairly intuitive on first glance. I need to do more thinking to come to a conclusion on both of these positions. Regardless, it seems clear that intruding on someone's body or property is permissible under the four conditions that I outlined earlier, i.e. as a necessary means to bring faultless individuals out of perilous circumstances. Therefore, it seems that ownership rights are not *absolute* but are *defeasible*, i.e. they provide *prima-facie* moral obligations as opposed to *conclusive* obligations. This means there is a strong moral *presumption* against intruding on someone's body or property, but such intrusinos can be justified in certain extenuating circumstances.

## The state

Libertarians are notorious for oftentimes rejecting regulations by the state that many see as morally permissible. For example, many libertarians reject forms of wealth redistribution, welfare states, social safety nets, etc. because (they believe) the state violates our ownership rights insofar as we are forced to fund these services against our will. Some libertarians (anarchists) even claim that _all_ mandatory taxation is unjust. If this claim is correct, then it seems that libertarianism is committed to the rejection of the state, as most conceptions of the state involve mandatory taxation of its citizens. 

Are these conclusions correct? As a libertarian who endorses self-ownership and private property, am I committed to the rejection of the mandatory taxation by the state? If not, am I committed to the rejection of wealth redistribution, welfare states, etc. by the state? I believe that libertarianism is *not* committed to either of these conclusions. However, as a libertarian, one should be immediately *skeptical* of such actions since they seem like clear instances of intrusions that constitute rights violationos. The challenge, then, is to give a *justification* for these activities by the state in a way that is compatible with the libertarian commitment to self-ownership and private property that I have formulated thus far.

In this section, I will outline and (briefly) justify a few kinds of activities that I believe the state is permitted to engage in. First, I will consider non-negotiable state activities, i.e. activities that the state is permitted/obligated to practice regardless of whether the activities serve the common interest or common will of its citizens. Second, I will consider negotiable state activities, i.e. activities that the state is permitted/obligated to practice only if, and because, the activities serve the common interest or common will of its citizens. These activities include many activities that are accepted by many non-libertarians, so one might wonder whether my formulation of libertarianism is meaningfully differrent from non-libertarianism. Therefore, to show that my views retain a libertarian flavor, I will conclude by listing some limitations on the state that I endorse which many non-libertarians oppose

### Non-negotiable state activities

Here, I will consider *non-negotiable* permissible forms of state activities. This includes activities that the state is permitted/obligated to practice regardless of whether the activities serve the common good or common will of its citizens. There are two kinds of activities that I have in mind here: (1) the state is permitted to redistribute resources in order to guarantee a certain *egalitarian* distribution of opportunity to natural resources, and (2) the state is permitted to redistribute resources to guarantee a certain *sufficientarian* access to essential goods. I believe that the state is justified in imposing mandatory taxation to subsidize these activities, and that the justification is perfectly compatible with the libertarian formulation that I have given thus far.

**Egalitarianism**. First, the state is permitted to redistribute resources in order to guarantee an *egalitarian* distribution of opportunity to natural resources. Recall from earlier that I accept *equal economic value left-libertarianism*, which means that everyone is entitled to opportunity to an equally valuable share of natural resources, where "valuable" is measured in terms of economic value. On this theory, if a person controls an excessive share (i.e. more than their fair share) of natural resources, he would control resources that he does not have a right to; further, he would actually violate the property rights of other individuals insofar as they are actively prevented from acquiring their fair share of natural resources due to this excessive control. Therefore, the state is permitted to forcibly transfer resources from those with excessive resources to those who are prevented from acquiring their fair share of resources. It should be clear that the state is not *initiating* force in performing this activity. If a person controls an excess share of resources, *that person* has initiated force on the rest of society by depriving others of resources to which they are entitled; when the state extracts the excess resources, they are *retaliating to* rather than *initating* force.

There are a few ways this kind of taxation can be implemented. This can be implemented by directly confiscating any excessive natural resources that a person controls. However, this may not be a preferable system, even from the perspective of the worst off members of society. Some individuals are particularly effective at generating societal value from a certain amount of natural resources. So it might be in the best interest of society to allow certain individuals to control an excessive amonut of natural resources. But the state still needs to correct for the fact that such individuals prevent others from acquiring their fair share of natural resources. The remedy is this: instead of directly confiscating excess resources from individuals who control excessive natural resources, the state should force such individuals to *compensate* society for their excess share. This can be done a mandatory tax that extracts economic resources (natural or otherwise) which are redistributed to other members of society. The level of redistribution must be large enough such that, for every person, either (a) they have opportunity to their fair share of natural resources, or (b) the combined economic value of the natural resources that they have opportunity to and the resources that they receive due to redistribution is at least as valuable as their fair share of natural resources. In other words, all individuals who control excess shares of natural resources must be taxed so much that their disproportionate control does not make any person economically *worse-off* relative to if they had opportunity to their fair share of natural resources.

**Sufficientarianism**. Second, the state is permitted to redistribute resources to guarantee a *sufficientarian* threshold in terms of reasonable opportunity to essential goods. Specifically, the state is permitted to impose mandatory taxation to redistribute resources to help faultless individuals escape perilous circumstances. This is justified based on the "exception rights" that I mentioned earlier. As mentioned earlier, we are permitted to intrude on someone else or their property so long as the following conditions for "exception rights" are met: 

1. The intrusion imposed is of a reasonable level.
2. The intrusion (or a similar level of intrusion) is *necessary* to bring a needy person out of peril.
3. The needy person is in peril through no fault of their own. 
4. The perilous circumstances are of a sufficiently large gravity. 

I believe mandatory taxation by the state can be justified so long as these conditions are met. Condition 1 implies that the tax rate must be reasonably low. Condition 2 implies that the tax rate should be as low as is necessary to ensure everyone can escape peril. Condition 3 implies that the taxation should be restricted to alleviating burdens for those are not responsible for their circumstances. Finally, condition 4 implies that the taxation should be restricted to alleviating burdens of a sufficiently large gravity. Keep in mind that these conditions are required only for justifications of state activity based on "exception rights." I go into more detail on this particular justification of state activity in a [separate post](https://reasonwithoutrestraint.com/justifying-the-state-on-libertarian-grounds/). Other justifications of state activity are not subject to these conditions.

What kinds of burdens are of a sufficiently large gravity? At a minimum, I believe the state is permitted to impose mandatroy taxation to guarantee *reasonable* opportunity to make use of one's rights, e.g. the rights associated with self-ownership, the rights with property ownership, and the right to the opportunity of a fair share of natural resources. In order to guarantee these rights, the state must ensure that these rights are, at least, *protected* from interference by others. In other words, the state is permitted, at a minimum, to impose mandatroy taxation to fund the activities of what Nozick calls the "[minimal state](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Night-watchman_state)", which is a state that is limited to the police, the courts, and the military. However, to have *reasonable* opportunity to make use of one's rights, it is not sufficient that one is *protected* from interference by others. It is also necessary that one have the *capacity* to take advantage of their rights. Therefore, I also believe that the state is permitted to subsidize education since education is necessary to acquire the capacity to take advantage of one's rights. Perhaps other essential goods (e.g. health care) may be subsidzed as well, but this is less clear. 

Unlike the first kind of state activity mentioned in this section (extracting and redistributing *excess* resources), this second this kind of state activity (extracting and redistributing resources to guarantee *sufficientarian* access to essential goods) *does* involve the initiation of force. Ideally, the state could completely subsidize *sufficientarian* access to essential goods by solely relying on the resources extracted from those who control excess resources (since such extractions would not involve any initiation of force). If not, the state is permitted to initiate force so long as they meet the force conditions above.

### Negotiable state activities

Here, I will consider *negotiable* permissible forms of state activities. This includes activities that the state is permitted to practice only if, and because, they serve the common good or common will of its citizens. There are two kinds of activities that I have in mind here: (1) state enforcement of the rules regarding common property, and (2) the regulation of negative externalities, including what I call *opportunity-constraining incentives*. I believe that the state is justified in imposing mandatory taxation to subsidize these activities, and that the justification is perfectly compatible with the libertarian formulation that I have given thus far.

**Common property.** The first negotiable form of permissible state activity concerns common property. Recall that common property refers to resources where multiple people have the right to use the resource in specified ways. Let's limit the discussion here to collective property - i.e. only a particular group of individuals are permitted to use the resource because that will be easier. If a certain resource is collectively owned by a group of people, then there needs to be rules on how the resource may be used. It seems that the owners of the resource should be the ones who determine the content of the rules. Therefore, anyone who uses the property without respecting these rules would violate the rights of the property owners. Because the state is justified in enforcing property rights (as I argued earlier), the state is also permitted to enforce the rules governing collective property that are decided by the owners. This includes excluding non-members from using the property and ensuring that members who use the property obey the rules decided by the group. I called this a *negotiable* state activity because the state is only permitted to enforce rules which are decided by a certain group of people (namely, the owners of the collective property). 

**Negative externalities**. The second negotiable form of permissiible state activity concerns negative externalities. Many libertarians agree that we are justified in interfering with economic transactions that impose negative externalities on others (e.g. left-libertarian [Peter Vallentyne (2007)](https://philpapers.org/rec/VALLAT) argues that the state may legitimately overcome market failures in general). For example, many agree with regulating factories to limit their production of pollution. I agree with these kinds of regulations, so I believe the state is definitely permitted to intervene to regulate these kinds of negative externalities. However, I believe that certain consequences of economic transactions should be considered negative externalities that many may not agree with. Specifically, I believe the state is permitted to regulate economic transactions that produce *opportunity-constraining incentives* (this is my personal terminology). *Opportunity-constraining incentives* occur when the following conditions are met: 

1. In a free market, fully informed and fully rational individuals are incentivized to participate in economic transactions of type X.
2. These incentives lead to high participation in economic transactions of type X, which leads to the absence of opportunities of type Y.
3. These fully informed and fully rational individuals would prefer to live in a society with the existence of opportunities of type Y and the absence of economic transactions of type X.

When these situations arise, the state is permitted to outlaw such transactions to prevent these *opportunity-constraining incentives*. A more concrete example may be useful. Imagine a free market where no corporations provided benefits such as time-off, safety regulations, work breaks, etc. to their employees. Some corportations attempt to provide benefits to employees, but this causes the businesses to be less productive. As a result, consumers are incentivized to support corporations without benefits (e.g. because they are able to sell goods at a lower price because they are more productive). This leads to corporations without benefits being the only successful businesses, which means that corporations without benefits are the only available opportunities for employment. In actuality, consumers (if fully informed and fully rational) would *prefer* to live in a society where corporations provided benefits to employees despite the overall decrease in economic productivity. In these situations, I believe the state is permitted to remove such *opportunity-constraining incentives* as the 3 conditions from above are met: (1) in a free market, fully informed and fully rational consumers are incentivized to support corporations that do not provide benefits to workers, (2) these incentives lead to corporations without benefits being the only successful businesses, and (3) fully informed and fully rational individuals would prefer to live in a society where corporations provided benefits to employees despite the decrease in economic productivity. 

In situations like this, the state may prevent *opportunity-constraining incentives* by either (a) outright banning the economic transactions that produce such incentives (e.g. forcing corporations to provide benefits to employees), or (b) taxing economic transactions that produce these incentives (e.g. taxing corporations that do not provide benefits to employees) to the point that such transactions are no more economically attractive than alternatives. What justifies this kind of state interference? One might say that it improves societal well-being but, as a libertarian, this is not usually sufficient to permit the initiation of interference. A true defense of this intervention is beyond the scope of this post, but I can give a rough sketch. 

The basic idea is that the state would not be *initiating* interference in this instance. Economic transactions that produce *opportunity-constraining incentives* constitute *initiations* of interference. Harmful *incentives* can interfere with someone's life just as much as a *threat* can. Consider what makes a threat to violence an unjust interference in someone's life. The problem with a *threat* to violence is not that it directly *commits* violence on a person. The problem with a threat to violence is, if it is legitimate threat, that it unjustifiably modifies the *rational* options available to a person. If I threaten to kill Adam if he doesn't punch Bob, then, if the threat is legitimate, Adam no longer has the rational option to refuse to punch Bob, which means I have interfered with both Adam and Bob, and I have violated both of their rights. Likewise, incentives can unjustifiably modify the *rational* options available to a person. For example, if I were to incentivize a group of people to steal your property (e.g. offered them money on the condition that they robbed you), then I have interfered with your right to property. So creating threats and creating incentives can be wrong for very similar reasons. In fact, threats can be considered a special *type* of incentive (specifically *negative* incentives). With that being said, I consider the participation in economic transactions that produce *opportunity-constraining incentives* are unjust initiations of interference on everyone else's ability to participate in the economy as they truly desire. Thus, the state is justified in regulating transactions that produce these incentives; the state would be *retaliating to*, as opposed to *initiating*, interference. Much more needs to be said but this, I believe, is a sufficient rough sketch.

The regulation of *opportunity-constraining incentives* can justify imposing regulations that many [communitarians](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/communitarianism/#PolCom) endorse. For example, this kind of reasoning can perhaps justify "imposing restrictions on large-scale discount outlets such as Wal-Mart that threaten to displace small, fragmented, and diverse family and locally owned stores" or "implementing laws regulating plant closures so as to protect local communities from the effects of rapid capital mobility and sudden industrial change."

In this section, I stated that whether the state is permitted to engage in the activities mentioned here depends on the common will (or common interest) of its citizens. I have not specified the *procedure* that ought to be used to determine the common will (or common interest) of the citizens. In principle, it does not matter what procedure is used. We could have a democratic process or we could have a group of elites determine the common will/interest of the citizens. In practice, however, we ought to use whatever best *approximates* the common will/interest of the citizens. My post here is completely agnostic with respect to what this procedure should be. The best system for determining the common will/interest of the people may be a democracy, [epistocracy](https://www.vox.com/2018/7/23/17581394/against-democracy-book-epistocracy-jason-brennan), monarchy, [noocracy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Noocracy), etc. If the negotiable state activities are to be decided democratically, then this creates a new non-negotiable kind of state activity. The state would now have a non-negotiable duty to provide and protect the institutions necessary to properly facilitate democratic decision making. For example, the state must provide public education so that citizens are reasonably informed, and the state must guarantee that people have reasonable opportunity to cast their vote.

### Differences with other theories

I have mentioned many permissible state activities that many non-libertarians agree with. For example, I claimed that the state is permitted to guarantee a certain *egalitarian* distribution of opportunity to natural resources, and that the state is permitted to redistribute resources to guarantee a certain *sufficientarian* access to essential goods. I also claimed that the state is permitted to intervene in the market to prevent certain negative incentives that may be created in a free market. So it might seem that my views are not meaningfully different from the views of other non-libertarians or the views of other non-libertarian theories (such as e.g. Rawlsianism, egalitarianism, welfarism, etc.). Therefore, to show that my views retain a deeply libertarian flavor, I will conclude by listing some limitations on the state that I endorse which many non-libertarians oppose:

* I support freedom from interference to a far higher degree than the vast majority of people. For example, consider freedom of association. I believe that private companies should be allowed to discriminate customers and employees based on any characteristics, including based on characteristics that constitute [protected classes](https://www.subscriptlaw.com/blog/protected-classes), e.g. race, color, national origin, religion, sex, age, or disability. The one exception to this general rule is if rampant discrimination against a particular group deprived them of opportunity to essential goods such as housing, education, medical care, occupation, etc. (because the members of such a marginalized group would have "exception rights" to intrude upon the businesses who discriminate against them). However, even with this exception, my view is still *far* from the typical view because I don't believe this exception applies in the U.S. today, which means I don't think anti-discrimination laws in the U.S. today are just. Furthermore, even if this exception applied, the proper solution need not be to force companies to associate with others against their will. A better solution could be to redistribute resources to members of the disadvantaged group and/or tax businesses that discriminate against such individuals. What was said about freedom of association can be applied to many other freedoms, such as e.g. freedom of speech and freedom to engage in "[victimless crimes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Victimless_crime)" (e.g. recreational drug use, prostitution, etc.).
* The promotion of aggregate well-being is not sufficient to justify the initation of interference. The state may *initiate* interference only to guarantee the *sufficientarian* access to essential goods that I mentioned earlier. Note that state intrusion to guarantee the sufficientarian threshold is not justified merely whenever it improves well-being. Rather, such intrusion is justified when such intrusion is *reasonable* and is *necessary* to help *faultless* individuals escape *perilous* circumstances. One might argue that whether a circumstance is perilous boils down to well-being, but (1) there's no reason to believe that this is the case (e.g. instead of low well-being, perilous circumstances could be defined based on lack of resources, capabilities, or autonomy, as different [sufficientarian](https://oxfordre.com/politics/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780190228637.001.0001/acrefore-9780190228637-e-1382) theories say), (2) even if perilous circumstances are determined by well-being, this would still only permit initiating interference to bring individuals up to a certain threshold, as opposed to permitting any interference that improved well-being, and (3) there are 3 other necessary conditions to justify initiating the interference (the interference must be of a reasonable cost, it must be necessary, and the beneficiary must be faultless).
* There is no problem with rampant inequalities in economic resources. I only have two requirements concerning economic resources. I require that (1) that everyone has whatever is necessary to have *sufficientarian* access to essential goods that I mentioned earlier, and (2) everyone has *opportunity* to acquire equally valuable *natural* resources. Note how this second principle, while *egalitarian* in spirit, permits rampant inequalities in economic resources This second principle permits such inequalities because (a) it is concerned with *natural* resources specifically, as opposed to economic resources in general (i.e. it is permissible for Adam to have more opportunity to acquire certain resources than Bob if those resources are, e.g. the product of Adam's labor), and (b) it is concerned with *opportunity* to acquire resources not *holdings* directly (i.e. it is permissible for Adam to have more natural resources than Bob if this is because Adam was more industrious rather than because Adam had more *opportunity* to such resources). The rampant inequality permitted here is unlike, say, [Rawlsianism](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/rawls/#TwoPriJusFai) which permits economic inequalities only if they are "to the greatest benefit of the least-advantaged members of society".
* State activities, both negotiable and non-negotiable state activities, should be as decentralized as is reasonably possible (in accordance with the [subsidiarity principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subsidiarity)). In other words, when determining which scope of government (e.g. city, state, or federal) to perform a certain activity, there should be a strong *presumption* towards more local governments performing the activity. State activities should be performed by broader levels of government *only if* more local governments cannot do so reasonably (e.g. national defense). This differs from the political views of many other individuals who seem to want their preferred policies be implemented at the highest level of governments possible. There are a few reasons why I hold the strong presumption for more local governments. Some of these reasons do not depend on any of the considerations in this post, e.g. decentralizing state power can be a useful remedy against [tyranny of the majority](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tyranny_of_the_majority#Federated_centralization_excess). Other reasons do appeal to some of the considerations in this post, e.g. collective property is often owned by individuals within a given geographical region, and the owners of collective property ought to determine the rules governing the use of such property.

These are just a few important examples that I currently have in mind. I believe this should be sufficient to show that my views here are meaningfully different from those of many non-libertarians.

## Conclusion

It may be useful to summarize the formulation that I've described in this post. First, like almost all libertarians, I endorse self-ownership, which is constituted by a bundle of specific rights including a liberty-right to use their body in ways that they choose and a claim-right that others not use one's body without their consent. Regarding world-ownership, I believe we should have a strong presumption towards treating resources as private property. I believe private property ought to be distributed such that everyone has opportunity to equally valuable shares of natural resources, where "valuable" is measured in terms of economic value. When privatization is not feasible, resources should be treated as common property. 

Regarding the state, I believe there are some activities that the state is permitted/obligated to practice regardless of whether the activities serve the common interest or common will of its citizens. This includes state activities to guarantee a certain *egalitarian* distribution of opportunity to natural resources and activities to guarantee a certain *sufficientarian* access to essential goods. Possibly, the state may also have a non-negotiable permission/obligation to provide and protect the institutions necessary to properly facilitate democratic decision making (if democracies are the best systems for determining the common interest/will of its citizens). There are also activities that the state is permitted/obligated to practice only if, and because, the activities serve the common interest or common will of its citizens. This includes enforcing the rules of collective property and regulating economic transactions that have sufficiently damaging negative externalities. 

As mentioned above, this post was meant to be a sketch of a formulation of my form of libertarianism. There were many controversial issues addressed that I did not provide much justification for. I may address these issues in a future post. Here's a list of some such issues:

1. What justifies self-ownership?
2. What justifies my theory of private property? 
3. What justifies the presumption of treating resources as private property rather than common property? 
4. What justifies state intervention to prevent what I called "opportunity-constraining incentives"?
5. Is there a single principle or 

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNTE5NDg4NTMxLDExNjY1NTYwMSwtMTg0OT
I0MTY0LC04NzQyMjU3MDEsLTE4MDE5NTM3NzQsLTE4NzcwNDIy
NjcsLTE0MDI2MTg0MDYsMjA4ODEyODIxMiwtMTMwOTQzNTY4LD
Q4NzI4NDc2NSwtNzY4OTkxMjY1LDEwNDQ3NTAyMTksLTE4OTY2
MTczNTYsLTE4ODY1Nzc0NzksLTcyMDg1MTAxNCwtMzM2NTk0Nz
IzLC0yMTM2NzQ2Mjk3LC00MzczMjUwNDIsLTE4MDg5Njc4NDAs
MTY3MTgyODIxMl19
-->