### Racial Disparities

Most people are aware that there are significant disparities between Blacks and Whites with regard to a wide range of important social outcomes, including crime, income, education, poverty, welfare usage, etc. In fact, for almost every measurable result that we find important, we find that Blacks perform significantly worse than Whites. For example, [US census data (2017)](https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2018/demo/p60-263.pdf) shows that Black household income is more than one-third lower than White household income ($40,258 vs $68,145). Black households are also over twice as likely to be poor (21% vs 8.7%). Far more troubling are the crime and educational disparities.

Data from [FBI crime statistics (2015)](https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2015/crime-in-the-u.s.-2015/tables/table-43) shows that Black people commit a significantly disproportionate amount of crime in the United States. Despite making up on 13% of the US population, Black people commit 36% of violent crime in the US. Even worse, they commit over half of the robberies and murders in the country. Among criminals under the age of 18, Black youth commit over 60% of the robberies and murders in the country, and over half of violent crime. This is *by far* the highest violent crime rate of any racial or ethnic group in the country. In 2003, the [Bureau of Justice Statistics](https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/piusp01.pdf) released a report showing that 1 in 3 Black males could be expected to go to prison if the current rates of imprisonment had remained unchanged (fortunately, imprisonment rates have decreased since then). We also know that these large statistical disparities are the result of *actual* disparities in criminal activity, rather than merely being the result of, say, increased police presence. Victimization data shows that there is a real epidemic of crime in Black communities. [The CDC (2015)](https://www.cdc.gov/healthequity/lcod/men/2015/black/index.htm) reports that homicide is the leading cause of death for Black males aged 15-34, with nearly half of deaths for men aged 15-24 the result of homicide. Contrast this with White males for whom homicide causes only 8% of deaths [[CDC (2015)](https://www.cdc.gov/healthequity/lcod/men/2015/white/index.htm)]. 

There are also significant racial gaps in academic achievement. Data from the [National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) (2019)](https://nces.ed.gov/programs/raceindicators/indicator_RFA.asp) reports that Blacks are about twice as likely as Whites to fail to complete High School, and half as likely to attain a bachelor's degree. The academic achievement disparities show up far before High School graduation. At every age-level, Black students perform significantly worse than White students on nationally standardized [reading](https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d17/tables/dt17_221.90.asp) and [mathematics](https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d17/tables/dt17_222.90.asp) according to the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP). In 2012, only 70% of Black 17-year-olds achieved an NAEP reading score of at least 250 - a score that indicates an ability "to search for specific information, interrelate ideas, and make generalizations about literature, science, and social studies materials". For comparison, 87% of White 17-year-olds and 74% of White *13*-year-olds achieved that score. In that same year, only 1% of Black 17-year-olds achieved a mathematics score of at least 350 (the highest score level reported), compared to 9% of White 17-year-olds. Only 34% of Black 17-year-olds achieved a mathematics score of 300, which indicates an ability to "perform reasoning and problem solving involving fractions, decimals, percents, elementary geometry, and simple algebra." By contrast, over 70% of White 17-year-olds and over 41% of White *13*-year-olds surpassed that score. This means that the average Black 17-year-old is less proficient in mathematics and reading than the average White 13-year-old. Similar disparities of varying magnitudes are found at every age-level in every state in the country (see [here](https://www.nationsreportcard.gov/reading_math_2015/#reading/state/gaps?grade=8) for achievement racial gaps by state in 2015).

The effects of the gaps are most pronounced at the extremes of the distribution of academic achievement. There are almost no Black students among the top academic scorers. For example, we find the [following gaps](http://www.jbhe.com/features/49_college_admissions-test.html) by race on SAT scores:
> On the math SAT, only 0.7 percent of all black test takers scored at least 700 compared to 6.3 percent of all white test takers. Thus, whites were nine times as likely as blacks to score 700 or above on the math SAT. Overall, there were 45 times as many whites as blacks who scored 700 or above on the math SAT.

> If we raise the top-scoring threshold to students scoring 750 or above on both the math and verbal SAT — a level equal to the mean score of students entering the nation's most selective colleges such as Harvard, Princeton, and CalTech — we find that in the entire country 244 blacks scored 750 or above on the math SAT and 363 black students scored 750 or above on the verbal portion of the test. Nationwide, 33,841 students scored at least 750 on the math test and 30,479 scored at least 750 on the verbal SAT. Therefore, black students made up 0.7 percent of the test takers who scored 750 or above on the math test and 1.2 percent of all test takers who scored 750 or above on the verbal section.

These extreme discrepancies suggest that there are almost no Blacks with the academic achievement required for the nation's most elite and prestigious positions.

### Why IQ matters

Many of these disparities are likely caused by IQ differences. Before explaining why, I'll explain a bit about IQ and score distributions to get an understanding of their scores. IQ tests are designed to measure cognitive abilities that we commonly label "intelligence". Now, there is some debate over whether IQ *really* tests for "intelligence", or whether it tests for only a particular cognitive capacity at the expense of other equally valid conceptions of intelligence (e.g. such as emotional or bodily-kinesthetic intelligence). These are semantic/political questions that I avoid here. For the rest of this post, whenever I use the word "intelligence", it will be in reference to the abilities measured by IQ tests. I do this for two reasons: (1) we have widespread population statistics on IQ and other similar tests, unlike e.g. tests for emotional intelligence, and (2) IQ effectively predicts many of the social outcomes that we care deeply about (which I show below) far better than other measures. Of course, IQ isn't *inherently* important. It's important only as a proxy for other important outcomes such as educational attainment or occupational performance. Thus, when we do not always have access to the IQ scores that we want, I will sometimes reference data that measures cognitive capacity using achievement tests directly or using other kinds of tests which are very good proxies for IQ.

IQ scores are normed for a given population to produce a mean score of 100 and a standard deviation (SD) of 15 points. Because IQ scores are [normally distributed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normal_distribution), 32% of the population has IQs more than a standard deviation away from the mean. This means that 16% of the population have IQs below 85, and 16% have IQs above 115. In a normal distribution, about 5% of the population has an IQ more than two standard deviations (30 points) from the mean. So about 2.5% of people have IQs below 70 and about 2.5% have IQs above 130. We also know that IQ is fairly stable across a person's lifetime. [Neisser et al. (1996)](http://psych.colorado.edu/~carey/pdfFiles/IQ_Neisser2.pdf) (page 81) reports that an individual's age 17-18 IQ correlates at r=0.86 with their age 5-7 IQ, and correlates at r=0.96 with their age 11-13 IQ. In other words, IQ at age 6 explains about 75% (r^2 = 0.86^2) of the variation in IQ at age 18. Thus, we can predict with fairly high accuracy a person's IQ at adulthood if we know their IQ at childhood. 

#### High IQs predict success

We know that IQs predicts academic achievement very well. For example, [Koenig et al. (2008)](http://www.iapsych.com/iqmr/koening2008.pdf) estimated that IQ has a r=0.78 correlation with SAT math and a r=0.74 correlation with ACT math. For comparison, these correlations are higher than the correlation between SAT Math and SAT verbal (r=0.74) and between ACT math and ACT verbal (r=0.67). In a recent review of intelligence research by experts, [Nisbett et al. (2012)](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/c03f/f20904c35a370534a9d3710453dd6dc7a2d2.pdf) summarized the predictive power of IQ as follows:

>  ...the measurement of intelligence — which has been done primarily by IQ tests — has utilitarian value because it is a reasonably good predictor of grades at school, performance at work, and many other aspects of success in life (Gottfredson, 2004; Herrnstein & Murray, 1994). For example, students who score high on tests such as the SAT and the ACT, which correlate highly with IQ measures (Detterman & Daniel, 1989), tend to perform better in school than those who score lower (Coyle & Pillow, 2008). Similarly, people in professional careers, such as attorneys, accountants, and physicians, tend to have high IQs. Even within very narrowly defined jobs and on very narrowly defined tasks, those with higher IQs outperform those with lower IQs on average, with the effects of IQ being largest for those occupations and tasks that are most demanding of cognitive skills (F. L. Schmidt & Hunter, 1998, 2004)

#### Low IQ scores predict social ills

Significantly low IQs predict a wide range of negative social outcomes. For example, [Murray and Herrnstein (1994)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Bell_Curve) report the following outcomes for non-Hispanic whites of various IQ scores in *The Bell Curve*: of those with IQs in the normal range (90-110), 6% are High School dropouts, 8% of women are chronic welfare recipients, and 3% have been incarcerated; of those with IQs between 75-90, 35% are High School dropouts, 17% of women are chronic welfare recipients and 7% of the men have been incarcerated; and of those with IQs below 75, 55% are High School dropouts, 31% of women are chronic welfare recipients, and 7% of men have been incarcerated.

Low IQ scores predict a low likelihood of holding skilled and prestigious occupations. For example, [Hauser (2002)](https://www.gwern.net/docs/iq/2002-hauser.pdf) found that half of all janitors have an IQ just above 90 (Figure 12), slightly more than 25% have IQs above 100 and almost none (slightly more than 5%) have IQs above 110. At the other end of the extreme, the average electrical engineer has an IQ over 110, a small minority (<25%) have IQs below 100 and almost none (<5%) have IQs below 90. Generally speaking, the likelihood of a sub-90 person attaining an occupation requiring complex information processing (e.g. doctors, engineers, professors, analysts, etc.) is very unlikely. Rather, they are more likely to be found in unskilled or low-skilled labor (e.g. janitors, manual laborer). 

#### Black-White IQ differences

It has been a relatively established fact that the average IQ score for Blacks in the US is about one standard deviation (about 15 points) lower than for Whites. Studies usually put the average Black IQ slightly above 85 and the average White IQ slightly above 100. Because IQ scores are normally distributed for both racial groups, this means that only 16% of Blacks have an IQ above 100 (the average for Whites), and less than 3% of IQs above 115, which is a soft lower bound for many technical or professional careers requiring intelligence. The majority of Blacks (~65%) have an IQ below 90, compared to 25% of Whites. A significant minority of Blacks (~35%) have an IQ below 80, compared to less than 10% of Whites.  Given the earlier commentary on the negative ills of low IQ scores, the low IQ score of Blacks is likely responsible for many of the problems we find in the Black population regarding crime, income, education, etc. 

It should be noted that there is some controversy regarding the current IQ gap. [Nisbett (2005)](http://www1.udel.edu/educ/gottfredson/30years/Nisbett-commentary-on-30years.pdf) (page 302) argues that we have reason to believe that the present BW IQ gap is smaller than 15 points:
  
> We do not have actual IQ scores available to establish this point but rather various ability tests, most of which are highly correlated with IQ—some as high as .8 to .9. Though IQ scores would be preferable to speak directly to the question of IQ change, such data are unavailable in the form of a national random sample. In contrast, several probability samples of U.S. elementary and high school students are available. These include, over the period 1965–1994, the Equality of Educational Opportunity (EEO) survey, the National Longitudinal Study, the High School and Beyond survey, the National Education Longitudinal Study, and the National Assessment of Educational Progress program (NAEP)

Arguing against the claim the racial IQ gap is still 15 points, Nisbett uses the aforementioned ability tests as proxies for IQ to assert, "The gap is substantially less than that at the present time, probably more like 0.6–0.7 standard deviation or approximately 10 IQ points" (page 302). He goes on to say, "The largest study, conducted by the NAEP, indicated that, if trends were to continue, the gap in reading scores would be eliminated in approximately 25 years and the gap in science scores in approximately 75 years" (page 303). So, according to Nisbett, the best evidence currently suggests that the BW IQ gap has been narrowed to 10 points. I am not sure if this is the consensus among experts in the intelligence field, so I'll be assuming the BW IQ gap is 15 points for all that follows.

We find that many of the disparities between Blacks and Whites are mostly explained by differences in IQ. Data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) allows us to examine the effect that IQ has on the wage gap between Blacks and Whites born between 1957 and 1964. The NLSY required participants to take the Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT), which, like most cognitive tests, can be used as a proxy for IQ. After controlling for age and AFQT scores, [Johnson and Neal (1996)](http://www.people.virginia.edu/~wrj8y/finaljencks.pdf) (page 4) found that AFQT disparities explain about two-quarters of the BW wage gap for young men and all of the gap for young women. More specifically, the BW wage gap reduces from 24% to 9% for men after controlling for IQ. For young women, Black women go from a 17% disadvantage to a 5% *advantage* after controlling for AFQT scores. Further, using the same dataset, [Jencks and Phillips (1998)](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/9780815746096_chapter1.pdf) (page 6) report that, among men who scored above the 50th percentile on the AFQT, the average Black male earns 96% of the average White male after controlling for age. In other words, after controlling *only* for age among individuals with at least an average AFQT score, the BW racial wage gap is reversed for women and almost completely eliminated for men, independently of geography, education, parental socioeconomic status, or even occupation. 

Given the importance of IQ and the lifetime stability of IQ, one natural question might concern *when* racial IQ differences show up. We happen to know that significant IQ differences appear fairly early in life. [Rushton and Jensen (2005)](http://www1.udel.edu/educ/gottfredson/30years/Rushton-Jensen30years.pdf) (page 240) report that the BW IQ gap for children as young as 2-6 years old is about one standard deviation, the same gap that we find in adults. Whatever the cause of the IQ gap is, it must be something that appears far before children reach school age.

### The cause of the Black-White IQ gap

Given the importance of IQ and given the significant BW IQ gap, it seems evident that the BW IQ is causally responsible for many of the social disparities we find between Blacks and Whites. However, even if the BW IQ gap is not the primary variable *causing* these social disparities between Blacks and Whites (e.g. if both the IQ gap and the social disparities are caused by some common underlying factor), it is unlikely that the social disparities can be resolved without simultaneously resolving IQ disparities. Thus, determining if and how to resolve the racial IQ gap *is* important. In order to solve a problem, it is important to know the *cause* of the problem. One of the primary and most heated questions about the cause of the Black-White concerns how much of the gap can be attributed to environmental differences versus genetic differences. This is the question I will attempt to answer for the rest of this post. The answer to this question might have important implications on potential solutions for resolving the gap. For example, if the Black-White IQ gap can be attributed 100% to genetic differences, then certain candidate solutions which involve eradicating potential environmental differences will not be effective.

#### The failure of traditional socioeconomic explanations

The traditional environmental explanations of the racial IQ gap - e.g. parental income, parental education, the mother's marital status, etc. - are not supported by the evidence. Controlling for these factors demonstrates no or negligible reductions in the racial IQ gaps. From the [introductory chapter](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/9780815746096_chapter1.pdf) of *The Black-White Test Score Gap*, Jencks and Phillips (1998) report the following: 
- a two-year reduction of the black-white education gap among mothers would only reduce the IQ gap by about a point for children (page 22),
- eliminating Black-White income differences would reduce the IQ gap by about a point (page 23), and 
- marital status had no independent effect on a child's success (page 23). 

Also, going back to SAT scores, [we find](http://www.jbhe.com/features/49_college_admissions-test.html) that income explains almost none of the racial gap in SAT scores:

> Whites from families with incomes of less than $10,000 had a mean SAT score of 993. This is 129 points higher than the national mean for all blacks.

> Whites from families with incomes below $10,000 had a mean SAT test score that was 61 points higher than blacks whose families had incomes of between $80,000 and $100,000.

> Blacks from families with incomes of more than $100,000 had a mean SAT score that was 85 points below the mean score for whites from all income levels, 139 points below the mean score of whites from families at the same income level, and 10 points below the average score of white students from families whose income was less than $10,000.

Furthermore, when we control for environmental differences such as family income, any reduction in the IQ gap cannot be assumed to be entirely caused by the reduction in environmental differences. The reason is that parents with higher incomes are likely to more intelligent. Insofar as their intelligence is the result of their genes, these genes for success are likely to be inherited by their offspring. Therefore, when children from higher-income families have higher test scores, this may be the result of their superior environment, or it may be the result of their superior genetics (likely a combination of both). This is often referred to as genetic confounding. Therefore, even though controlling for socioeconomic status may reduce the BW IQ gap by a few points, it is not clear if this reduction is the result of controlling for environment, or the result of inadvertently controlling for genetics.

In a review of intelligence research by experts in the field, [Neisser et al. (1996)](http://psych.colorado.edu/~carey/pdfFiles/IQ_Neisser2.pdf) (page 94) concluded that socioeconomic factors explain relatively little of the BW IQ gap:
>  For one thing, the Black/White differential in test scores is not eliminated when groups or individuals are matched for SES (Loehlin et al., 1975). Moreover, the data reviewed in Section 4 suggest that--if we exclude extreme conditions--nutrition and other biological factors that may vary with SES account for relatively little of the variance in such scores. Finally, the (relatively weak) relationship between test scores and income is much more complex than a simple SES hypothesis would suggest. The living conditions of children result in part from the accomplishments of their parents: If the skills measured by psychometric tests actually matter for those accomplishments, intelligence is affecting SES rather than the other way around. We do not know the magnitude of these various effects in various populations, but it is clear that no model in which "SES" directly determines "IQ" will do. 

#### Heritability of IQ

One faulty argument that genetics explain most the racial IQ differences runs as follows. IQ [is largely heritable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heritability_of_IQ) (common estimates range 0.5 to 0.8), which means most individual differences in IQ are due to genetics. Differences between groups are just aggregated differences between individuals. Thus, most of the differences between groups is also due to genetics. This argument is flawed for several reasons:

1. Experts currently debate the applicability of the heritability estimates to the general population. Heritability estimates are often based on twin adoption studies which often features twins in a restricted range of environments - typically in upper/middle-class White adoptee families. But heritability estimates apply to specific populations. Thus, it is not clear if these estimates can be extrapolated generally to the general population. Imagine that you have a population with extremely wide variations in the quality of nutrition. Within that population, there is a subgroup of individuals that all have excellent nutrition. We would find that the heritability of, say, height will be much lower in the general population than in the elite subgroup. The reason is that there is less environmental variation for the elite subgroup, which means more of the differences that we *do* find for that subgroup will be due to genetic differences. But this cannot be safely extrapolated to the general population or other specific populations with different environments. 
2. Heritability says nothing about *between*-group differences. Heritability only tells us, within a population, how much of the differences *between individuals* can be attributed to genetic differences. But most individual differences can be attributed to genetics without the same being true of most group differences. Using height as an example can again be useful. Imagine you have two populations A and B with genetically identical populations of people. In population A, all individuals have equally excellent nutrition. In population B, all individuals have equally terrible nutrition. As you might expect, the average height of people in group A is larger than for people in group B. We would find that the heritability of height will be high for both groups, because there is very little environmental variation between individuals *within* either group to explain height differences. However, the *average* difference that we find *between* the two groups will be attributed 100% to genetics. So high heritability of differences within two groups does not imply that average differences between the two groups are due to genetics.

More information on heritability can be found [here](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK21866/).

The high heritability of IQ tells us that most individual variation is due to genetics. Thus, if everyone in a specific population were placed in the average environment, much of the initial variation in IQ would remain because of genetic variation. But we are interested in knowing the role that genetics plays in IQ differences *between* Blacks and Whites. This is a question that is not answered by heritability estimates. Instead, we have to look elsewhere at empirical data that bears directly on quantifying the genetic component of BW IQ differences.

#### Method

Before looking into the evidence concerning the genetic/environmental component of the racial IQ gap, it is important to be very clear about the problem I am trying to solve. I am not trying to determine whether genetics explain *any* of the racial IQ gap. Rather, the task is to *quantify* the role of genetics. Specifically, the goal is to determine just *how much* of the racial IQ differences can be attributed to genetic differences versus environmental differences. Focusing on the binary question of whether genetics play any role is neither important nor interesting for two reasons: 

1. If genetics explain 10% of the IQ gap (<2 IQ points) versus 90% (>13 points) of the gap, then this gives the same answer of "Yes" to the binary question "Do genes explain part of the BW IQ gap?". However, these two different scenarios have incredibly different implications on whether we should give significant weight to genetics. For example, if genetics explain less than 2 points of the IQ gap, then this is *practically* indistinguishable from genetics playing *no* role. 
2. It does not seem empirically feasible to possibly verify that genetics play *no* role in the racial IQ gap. For example, even if we found that Blacks and Whites had identical IQs under seemingly identical environment, it is possible that there actually is a 1 point IQ deficit for Blacks, but it is offset by a minor advantage in environment that is undetectable. Given the sparse data that we have, trying to tease out whether the data is best supported by the hypothesis that genetics explains 0 points versus 1 point of the BW IQ seems impossible.  

Thus, I only concern myself with trying to *quantify* the role that genetics plays in the BW IQ gap. Note that indirect pieces of data are not used here because they do not allow us to confidently quantify the role of genetics. For example, reaction time and brain size differences between races are often used to argue that genetics explains some of the racial IQ gap, but I do not reference data on these differences here for two reasons: 

1. It is not clear what proportion of these differences are due to genetics versus environment in the first place, and 
2. It is not clear how much these differences explain IQ differences. For example, regarding brain size differences: the correlation between brain size and intelligence is only 0.3-0.4 according to a meta-analysis by [McDaniel (2005)](http://www.people.vcu.edu/~mamcdani/Big-Brained%20article.pdf), and we have examples of groups with mean brain size differences (even after controlling for body sizes) with no mean IQ differences - e.g. men and women.

Therefore, I will be considering all data that gives direct evidence to quantify the genetic component of the BW IQ gap. This includes data that measures the following: the IQs of Blacks raised by White families, differences in IQs of Blacks and Whites raised in the same families, and the relation between IQ and European ancestry among Blacks. For each piece of data, I consider how well the data is explained by competing quantifications of the BW IQ gap - e.g. is the data best explained by a primarily environmental explanation (genetics explain 0-5 points of the IQ gap), a primarily genetic explanation (genetics explain 10-15 points of the IQ gap) or by a hybrid explanation of the BW IQ gap (genetic differences explain 5-10 points of the gap). 

I have said before that the question of importance is "*How much* of the BW IQ gap is due to genetics?" as opposed to "Are genetics responsible for *any* of the BW IQ gap?". There are a few ways of interpreting the question "How much of the BW IQ gap is due to genetics?". On one interpretation, answering this question requires determining how much of the IQ remains when Blacks and Whites are raised in the same environment. But interpreting the question in this manner is problematic for a few reasons:

1. Due to complex gene-environment interactions, determining how much the gap remains when Blacks and Whites were raised in the same environment might depend on the environment in question. For example, it could be the case that Blacks thrive particularly well in environment A as opposed to environment B, whereas Whites thrive particularly well in environment B. In that case, when placed in environment A, the BW IQ gap might be 5 IQ points in favor of Whites, but in environment B, the BW IQ gap could be 10 IQ points in favor of Whites. Do we say that genes explain 5 points of the IQ gap or 10 points? How do we know which environment to use as the baseline?
2. It is actually impossible to guarantee that Whites and Blacks are raised in the same environment. Even when adopted into the same families, Blacks and Whites may face different environments due to their superficial appearance. E.g. their parents, their peers and society in general might treat them differently based on their race. 

The first problem might be resolved by selecting the average White environment as the baseline. But there are a few issues with this. Firstly, this doesn't address the second problem that I mentioned. But let's assume we can sidestep that problem and place Blacks and Whites in the same environment as the average White person. We are still are left with some issues. For example, imagine that members of group A learn best in environment X whereas members of group B learn best in environment Y. For the sake of illustration, we can say environment X emphasizes auditory learning and Y emphasizes visual learning. Let's say that if either group is educated in their ideal environment, they will have a mean IQ of 100. If they are raised in the other environment, they will have a mean IQ of 90. Now, let's say that it turns out that there is a mean IQ difference of 10 points between A and B because both groups are raised in environment X. Now, under these conditions, there remains a 10 point IQ difference when both groups are raised in the average environment of A. But should we say that the IQ gap between A and B is due to genetics? In a certain sense we can say that the gap is due to genetics, because the difference we see is clearly the result of genetics. But in another sense we shouldn't say that it's due to genetics, because the difference could be eliminated if B was in environment Y.

Of course, I have no idea if Blacks and Whites respond differently to different environments with regard to IQ development. However, it's not something I assume a priori. Thus, the above problems that I outlined above are *potential* problems with identifying the question of "How much of the BW IQ gap is due to genetics?" with the question of "How much of the BW IQ gap would remain if raised in the average White environment?". Instead, I think the question should be understood as asking what the mean Black IQ would be not in the average White environment, but rather in the most ideal environment within some range of realistic feasibility, and then checking how far it deviates from the mean White IQ. By "range of realistic feasibility", I mean the kinds of environments that can be reasonably expected of responsible parents/teachers who are educated of the best parenting/teaching practices. Interpreting the question in this manner avoids the two problems that I mentioned above. Thus, this is the question that I will be attempting to address when evaluating the data below.

### Evidence that bears on quantifying the genetic component of the IQ gap

#### Minnesota Transracial Adoption Study

The [Minnesota Transracial Adoption Study (MTAS)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minnesota_Transracial_Adoption_Study) examined the IQs of 130 Black and Black-White mixed children and a number of White children who were all adopted by upper-middle-class White families. This study actually involves two sets of published results: the original study, [Scarr and Weinberg (1976)](http://www.kjplanet.com/amp-31-10-726.pdf), measured the IQs of the children at age 7; and a follow-up study, [Scarr and Weinberg (1992)](https://lesacreduprintemps19.files.wordpress.com/2012/12/the-minnesota-transracial-adoption-study-a-follow-up-of-iq-test-performance-at-adolescence1.pdf), which measured their IQs at age 17. At age 7, the IQs for the Black, mixed and White children were 96.8, 109.5 and 111.5, respectively (see Table 2 of the follow-up study). When the children were retested at age 17, everyone's scores had diminished. The IQs for Black, mixed and White children were 89.4, 98.5 and 105.6, respectively. The IQs of the Black adoptees at age 17 was not much larger than the IQs of their non-adopted racial peers. If this study did indeed equalize the environments for Blacks and Whites, then the results would seem to indicate that the racial IQ gap is largely caused by genetic differences. However, there are a few reasons caution against this interpretation:

1. Attrition favored the White children more than the Black/mixed children. Many of the low-scoring White adoptees from the original measurement did not return for the follow-up study. We know this because the age-7 average IQ of the original White group was 111.5, yet the age-7 average IQ of the White group that appeared for follow-up testing was 117.6, over 6 points larger than the original group (see Table 2 of the follow-up study). There was no significant IQ difference between the age-7 IQs of the original group or the follow-up group for both the Black and mixed group. This does not explain the IQ gap at age 7, but it does explain why the gap widened at age 17. [Thomas (2017)](https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d17/tables/dt17_221.90.asp) found that correcting for attrition resulted in adjusted age-17 IQs of Black, mixed and White children of 90.1, 98.3 and 101.8, respectively (Table 2). This reduces the Black-White gap from 16.2 to 11.7 points and the mixed-White gap from 7.1 to 3.5 points.

2. The Black children were adopted substantially later than the other children. The average White child was adopted at 19 months old (Table 5 of the original study), but the average Black child was adopted at 32 months old (see Table 10 of the original study). The study showed that late adoptees had much lower IQs than early adoptees. Black/mixed children adopted within one year of birth had a mean IQ of 99, whereas later adopted Black/mixed children had a mean IQ of 92 (See Table 2 of the follow-up study). There was no information on the effect of time of placement for the White children. There also is not enough information to determine if the late Black/mixed adoptees scored lower because they were disproportionately Black or if the Black adoptees scored lower because they were disproportionately adopted late. Nevertheless, age of adoption is important to keep in mind as a potential impact on the data. 

3. Even though the study may have equalized environments *after* adoption, it could not have equalized environments *before* adoption. For example, a high blood lead level in infants can result in a noticeable reduction in IQ during adulthood. In fact, a 10 μg/dL increase in blood lead level for infants aged 24-months [was associated](http://www.precaution.org/lib/low-level_lead_longterm_followup.19921001.pdf) with a 5.8-point decline in their age-10 IQ (page 857), and an 8.9-point decline in their age-10 KTEA Battery Composite Score (page 858) (normalized to a mean of 100 and SD of 15, just like IQ scores). Blood lead level might have been particularly important for the MTAS because, when it was first published in the 1970s, Black children aged 6 months-5 years [had much higher blood lead levels](http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/ad/ad079acc.pdf) (page 6) than similarly aged White children: over half of Black children (52%) in this age range had a blood lead level greater than 20 μg/dL, compared to only 18% of white children. Thus, blood lead level disparities (and any other potential pre-adoptive environmental disparities) could have instigated or exaggerated IQ disparities. The potential pre-adoptive environments may be particularly important for the Black adoptees given the late ages of adoption. Of course, we have no independent *direct* evidence that the Black adoptees were subject to inferior pre-adoptive environments, but it is something to consider when interpreting the results of this study. 

It should be noted that despite little-to-no IQ gains, the black and mixed children saw much higher levels of academic achievement than their non-adopted racial peers. The mixed adoptees scored in the 60th, 59th, 50th, and 40th percentiles in vocabulary scores, reading scores, mathematics scores, and class rank, respectively (see Table 6 of the follow-up study). For reference, the White adoptees scored in the 62th, 58th, 56th and 54th percentiles in those respective areas. The Black adoptees scored worse; they scored in the 54th, 48th, 36th, and 36th percentiles. This is much larger than the current scores we find for Blacks on NAEP mathematics and reading assessments. So while the black adoptees had significantly lower IQs, their academic achievement was not significantly lower than Whites adoptees for vocabulary scores and reading ability. Even the mathematics scores were not much lower than the national average (e.g. an IQ score in the 36th percentile is ~95, which is not significantly lower than average). Note that the White achievement scores here are almost certainly artificially inflated because they were not adjusted for attrition as we saw with IQ scores. They also don't take into account any of the other issues I mentioned that may have put the Black adoptees at an artificial disadvantage (i.e. differences in pre-adoptive environment).

In summary, taken at face value, this study seems compatible with a primarily genetic explanation of the racial IQ gap. After adjusting for attrition, it seems that the study suggests a genetic IQ gap of 11.7 between Blacks and Whites and 3.5 points between mixed and White children. Correcting for the other aforementioned issues with the study would likely reduce these gaps further, possibly allowing for a primarily (or, at least, significantly) environmental explanation. Regardless, the study is compatible with an environmental explanation for the vast majority of the BW *academic achievement* gap for vocabulary and reading ability and for a significant degree of the BW gap in mathematical ability.

#### German IQ study by Klaus Eyferth

[Eyferth (1959)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eyferth_study) studied the IQs of 83 white and 98 mixed (Black-White) children in Germany who were born between 1945 and 1953. The mothers of the children were all white Germans, mostly of low socioeconomic status. Their fathers were either white or black members of the US occupation forces. The white children had a mean IQ of 97.2, whereas the mixed children had a mean of 96.5, a negligible difference. The children were between the ages of 5 and 13 (average age of 10) at the time of testing.

There are some issues with this study, however. Firstly, the Black and White samples were not representative of the average population, because about 30% of black applicants were rejected admission to the armed forces, while only about 3% of whites were rejected. Thus, one could argue that this was a genetically elite sample of Blacks, and so the parity achieved here cannot be extrapolated to the general Black population. However, if there is a significant genetic explanation of the racial IQ differences, this would predict that the white children in the study would have significantly higher scores than the mixed children because:

1. The white soldiers had higher IQs than the black soldiers. Even though the admission test filtered out candidates below a certain threshold, the IQ scores for the white soldiers would *still* be distributed higher than that of the black soldiers (e.g. imagine removing all men and all women below 5'2 from the population; the resulting population would still have men taller than women, on average). In fact, [Jencks and Phillips (1998)] noted that James Flynn's analysis of the data suggests that the Black-White gap for the soldiers was about four-fifths that of the general population (see footnote 47 on page 19). Thus, despite the disproportionate acceptance rates, there was still a ~12 point IQ gap between the Black and White soldiers. Insofar as the BW IQ gap is genetic, similar differences should be inherited in the children.

2. [Regression to the mean](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heritability#Response_to_selection). Even if we assume that the white and black soldiers had similar IQs, the black children should have had lower IQs than the white children because, assuming that the racial IQ gap is mainly genetic, the black children IQs would regress to the genetic black mean, while the white children IQs would regress to the genetic white mean. For example, [Rushton and Jensen (2005)](http://www1.udel.edu/educ/gottfredson/30years/Rushton-Jensen30years.pdf) (section 9) argue that this regression should occur insofar are racial IQ differences are genetic:

> For any trait, scores should move toward the average for that population. So in the United States, genetic theory predicts that the children of Black parents of IQ 115 will regress toward the Black IQ average of 85, whereas children of White parents of IQ 115 will regress toward the White IQ average of 100.

So if racial IQ differences are mainly genetic, then regression to the mean should occur. This means that even though the IQ gap of the soldiers was ~3 points smaller than the gap in the general population (12 vs 15), much of this gap reduction would not have applied to the IQs of the children. Note that regression to the mean is found in other genetic traits such as height. This regression is quantified by geneticists by an equation known as "breeder's equation". 

Another issue with the study is that about 20-25% of the Black group was actually French North African. However, if the genetically Black soldiers, who constituted 75-80% of the group, had significantly lower genotypic IQs, this would be enough to cause a significant IQ gap between the mixed and White children. The only way this wouldn't be true is if the French North African soldiers had extremely large IQs to offset the lower IQs of the mixed children, but there's no reason to assume this. Therefore, the fact that we find no difference in IQ means that this study is most compatible with a primarily environmental explanation of the IQ gap.

#### British study of young children in nurseries

[Tizard (1972)](http://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/1127540.pdf) investigated 85 black, white, and mixed children aged 2-5 years raised in British long-stay residential nurseries. The children were given psychological tests to determine their cognitive abilities. The scores were normalized to give a mean of 100 and standard deviation of 10. On the Reynell Comprehension test, the white children scored 102.6 and the black/mixed children scored 106.3 (page 351). On the Reynell Expression test, the white children scored 98.5 and the black/mixed children scored 98.6. On the Minnesota Nonverbal test, the white children scored 101.3 and the black/mixed children scored 107.7. Apparently there is a fourth test, but I didn't manage to see it in the pdf. This study is most compatible with a primarily environmental explanation of the IQ gap. 

It has been argued that these results are actually consistent with there being significant racial differences in genetic IQ, but that the Black children of the study received higher IQs because of a superior environment. But I identified the central question "How much of the BW IQ gap is due to genetics?" with determining what the mean Black IQ would be in the most ideal environment within some range of realistic feasibility, and then checking how far that mean deviates from the mean White IQ. As far as I know, the quality of the environment for the Blacks in this study was not significantly better than for the Whites, at least not in a way that could not be reasonably replicated by responsible and educated parents/teachers. Thus, I take the fact that there exists feasible, realistic environments as in this study which can erase the BW IQ gap to be most compatible with a primarily environment explanation of the IQ gap.

#### Black children adopted by White versus Black families

[Moore (1986)](http://psycnet.apa.org/psycinfo/1986-24139-001) examined 23 black and biracial children adopted by middle-class white families and 23 age-matched black children adopted by middle-class black families. When their IQ scores [were measured](https://www.scribd.com/document/34145069/Elsie-G-J-Moore-Family-Socialization-and-the-IQ-Test-Performance-of-Traditionally-and-Transracially-Adopted-Black-Children) (Table 2), the black children adopted by black families had an average IQ of 104, while the black children adopted by white families had an average IQ of 117. The children were aged between 7 and 10 years at the time of testing. There is no evidence that these two groups differed in their genes, so the most plausible explanation is that the difference in the black/white family environments likely accounts for the 13 IQ point gap. 

It is true that the white families adopted a higher proportion of mixed children than the black families, and the biracial children had IQs 5 point larger than the black children (113 versus 108). Thus, one might argue that the 13 point IQ gap is caused by the differing degree of European ancestry of the two groups, rather than any environmental differences. However, when comparing Black and biracial children after controlling for the race of the adoptive families, we find no difference in IQ between Black and biracial children. For children adopted into black families, the average IQ of biracial children was 105.7 compared to 102.9 for black children. For children adopted into white families, the average IQ of biracial children was 116.5 compared to 118.0 for black children. So the IQs for biracial children was 10.8 points higher when raised in white families instead of black families, and the IQs of black children was 13.1 points higher. Thus, the data suggests that the environment of the White families explains the higher IQ score for biracial children, rather than the other way around. I take two main takeaways from this result:

1. After controlling for the race of the adoptive parents, there was no significant IQ advantage for biracial children. The IQs for biracial children was 2.8 points higher than "full" Blacks within Black families, and 1.5 points lower than "full" Blacks within white families. This is inconsistent with a significant genetic explanation of the IQ gap, which would predict that higher European ancestry should produce a higher IQ. The best explanation of this is a primarily environment explanation of the IQ gap: the reason higher European ancestry did not produce a higher IQ for the children in this study is that higher European ancestry is not associated with better genetics for IQ.

2. The environment of the Black parents seems to be not as conducive to cognitive development as the environment of the White parents. I don't know the cause of this disparity (different people would argue for different causes, e.g. lead, peer groups, parenting, wealth, schools, culture, neighborhoods, etc.), but it's clear from this study that Black and White *environments* have significantly different effects on IQ. And this environmental difference persists even though both groups of parents are upper/middle-class. Plausibly, the environmental difference would be even larger if we did not control for class in this manner, causing the 13-point IQ gap to widen, possibly explaining the entire 15 point IQ gap of the general population. The data from this study is easily explained by a primarily environmental explanation of the IQ gap: the environmental differences between the white and black families in this study also apply to black and white families in the general population.

#### IQs of mixed children with a White versus Black mother

[Nisbett (2005)](http://www1.udel.edu/educ/gottfredson/30years/Nisbett-commentary-on-30years.pdf) argued that, "If the Black–White IQ gap is largely hereditary, then children having one Black and one White parent should have the same IQ on average, regardless of which parent is Black" (page 305). However, Nisbett reports that among mixed children, it *does* matter which parent is Black. Namely, among 129 mixed (Black-White) 4-year-olds, children with white mothers have IQs 9 points higher than children with black mothers. 

Even when we control for whether the mother is married, we still find significant differences between mixed children with black versus white mothers. When looking at the same dataset referenced by Nisbett earlier, [Jencks and Phillips (1998)](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/9780815746096_chapter1.pdf) (footnote 41 on page 17) found that among married mothers, mixed children with white mothers had mean IQs of 104.7 whereas those with black mothers had mean IQs of 96.4 (8.3 IQ difference). Among single mothers, mixed children with white mothers had mean IQs of 99 whereas those with black mothers had mean IQs of 88 (11 IQ difference).

There is little evidence indicating that Black-White couples with white mothers are a more genetically elite selection of parents compared their counterparts with black mothers, especially not to a degree large enough to account for significant IQ differences we find. Thus, the large differences we find here are difficult to be explained by a primarily genetic explanation of the IQ gap. But these differences are easily explained by a primarily environmental explanation of the IQ gap: the environmental differences that explain the BW IQ gap of the general population are also operating between Black and White mothers in this study.

#### European Ancestry and IQ

If genetics are the primary explanation of the racial IQ gap, then we should expect that Blacks with higher levels of European ancestry should have significantly higher IQs than Blacks with lower levels of European ancestry. In fact, we find that the opposite is true. [Nisbett (2005)](http://www1.udel.edu/educ/gottfredson/30years/Nisbett-commentary-on-30years.pdf) reports that the correlation between IQ and lightness of skin (a proxy for European ancestry) is only 0.10, averaged over a large number of studies (page 304). A more direct, but still imperfect, measure of European ancestry involves looking at the frequency of various blood groups characteristic of Europeans. He shows that the correlation between IQ and European blood groups is only 0.05 among a sample of 144 Black adolescent twin pairs (page 306). This is not easily explained with a primarily genetic explanation of the racial IQ gap, but is perfectly explained by a primarily environmental explanation.

### Follow-up Testing

Many have criticized all of these studies except for the MTAS because they did not perform follow-up testing on the children. Their argument is as follows: the heritability of IQ increases as people age (which is true). Thus the IQ gains from the improved environment may fade as the impact of environment diminishes with age. There are two responses to this:

1. The potential decline in IQ gains for adopted children is not necessarily relevant. We are concerned with the IQ *gap* between blacks & whites. The Minnesota Transracial Study implies that there is no significant change in the IQ *gap* after age 7, even though the IQ gains diminished for all racial groups. Looking at this study, the black-white IQ gap fluctuated by only about 2 points after age 7, and that change can mostly be attributed to the exclusion of relatively lower IQ Whites during the follow-up testing. The only transracial adoption study that we have which featured follow-up studies suggests that the racial IQ gap does not significantly widen with age. Therefore, assuming that the MTAS study is representative in this regard, the lack of follow-up studies is no good reason to discount the latter three studies. While adoption studies do indicate that IQ gains tend to diminish with age, as far as I know, there is no data indicating that the diminishment is particularly strong for Black adoptees compared to White adoptees when raised in Whites households. 

2. The heritability of IQ in children is fairly significant ([about 45%](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heritability_of_IQ)), meaning genes play a significant role in the IQ of children. Therefore, if there were significant racial genetic IQ differences, then there would *not* be similar IQ scores for blacks and whites raised in similar environment *even as children*. Insofar as IQ is significantly heritable in children, and insofar as there are significant genetic racial IQ disparities, there will be a significant racial IQ gap at childhood even after equalizing environments. Therefore, the lack of an IQ gap during childhood after equalizing environments implies that either (a) the genetic component of IQ is not significant during childhood, or (b) there is no significant genetic Black-White IQ gap. We know that (a) is false, so we can infer that (b) is true.

### Conclusion

I believe that a reasonable and honest assessment of all the data presented suggests the following main takeaways: 

1. **The majority of the data is compatible with and easily explained by a primarily environmental explanation of the IQ gap between Blacks and Whites in the United States.** By "primarily environmental", I take this to mean genetics explain less than 5 points of the IQ gap. Therefore, I believe the data best indicates that there are realistic and feasible environments (e.g. the kinds of environments produced by White upper/middle-class adoptive White) such that if Blacks were raised in those environments, the IQ difference between Blacks and Whites would be less than 5 points. A primarily environmental explanation of the IQ gap explains (a) the results of the Eyferth (1959), Moore (1986) and Tizard (1972) studies showing no increased IQ for children with higher European ancestry when raised in comparable environments, (b) the lack of a correlation between European ancestry and IQ among Blacks, and (c) the superior IQs of children raised in White environments, found in Moore (1986) and found in mixed children with White rather than Black mothers. Lastly, a primarily environmental explanation of the IQ gap can potentially be compatible with the results of the MTAS when one controls for attrition and considers the possible impact of pre-adoptive environment on the children's IQs. A significantly genetic explanation of the IQ gap (i.e. more than 5 points of the IQ gap can be attributed to genetic differences) can potentially explain the results of the MTAS, but it is not straightforwardly compatible with the results of any of the other studies. The most parsimonious explanation is that genetics explain less than 5 points of the Black-White IQ gap.

2. **Even if we remain skeptical that environmental differences explain most of the racial IQ gap at *adolescence* because of the lack of follow-up testing, we still have solid evidence that environmental differences primarily explain other intellectual disparities between Blacks and Whites**. (a) the majority of the IQ gap at *childhood* is caused by environmental differences (based on all studies other than the MTAS), and (b) the majority of the *academic achievement* gap at *adolescence* is caused by environmental differences (based on the MTAS). This is especially true for vocabulary and reading achievement, but is also true for mathematical achievement to a large degree. Arguably, if the racial academic achievement gap can be eliminated, then any persisting IQ gap is of little significance (because the reason we care about IQ in the first place is because of its influence on things like academic achievement). Regardless, because we know that environmental differences explain most of the gaps in these areas, we should continue trying to eliminate these specific differences until these gaps are (mostly) eliminated.

3. **If 2 is granted, there is little practical importance in continuing to argue about the genetic/environmental nature of the racial IQ gap.** Until we reach roughly parity in adolescent *academic achievement* and in childhood IQ/achievement between Blacks and Whites, there are still identifiable significant environmental gaps regarding intellectual development. Quantifying the precise proportion of the IQ/achievement gap that is due to environment is important if we need to know when we have exhausted the possible environmental efforts to reduce the gap. But we know we haven't reached that point yet. Therefore, currently trying to precisely quantify the environmental proportion of the IQ/achievement gap serves more as a theoretical exercise than as a practical function. We can postpone answering questions about the precise genetic component of the gap until we know we've eliminated the significant environment differences that we know exist. When that happens, not only will questions about the genetic component of the IQ gap have more practical utility, but we would likely be in a position to give more accurate answers. However, if and when we do eliminate these specific environmental differences, I argue that it is likely that any remaining IQ gaps at *adolescence* will be of little importance. Until then, there is little *practical* purpose in arguing further about the genetic/environmental nature of the IQ gap.

4. **It is not clear what constitutes the important environmental differences are between Blacks and Whites.** These IQ studies show that there are significant environmental differences between Black children raised by Black parents versus White parents. The differences persist when we control for maternal marital status and when we limit to upper/middle-class professional families. We know that it does not seem to be obvious features such as income, parental education, or other traditional estimates of socioeconomic status, because, as stated earlier, controlling for these factors only eliminates a fraction of the intellectual disparities. Elsie Moore posited that one cause might be due to differences in Black and White parenting practices. Moore noted that upper/middle-class Black adoptive mothers were much more reprimanding and scornful while observing their children solve problems, whereas upper/middle-class White mothers were much more encouraging and rewarding during the same task. This might be a promising possibility to investigate, but currently there is not enough evidence to posit that this difference explains much of the IQ gap.

So that's all the relevant data that I'm aware of which would be relevant to an attempt to quantify genetic/environmental component of the racial IQ gap. Even if you disagree with my interpretation, I hope that (at the very least) this post has been valuable as a coherent collection of all the relevant studies along with their biggest criticisms. With all of the raw data laid bare in one place, you can provide your own interpretation of the data that you find most compelling. Of course, many of these studies have significant problems (e.g. possible sampling bias, sample size, lack of follow-up testing, etc.) which means no interpretation can be *proven*. Nevertheless, I believe the interpretation that I've provided here is the most *reasonable* response to the available evidence. Further research should be done so that we can come to a more reliable conclusion.
_____

**Further Reading**

For a review of the research on race and intelligence, including articulations of the primary arguments of all sides of the debate, I would recommend the following important works: 

- Arthur R. Jensen, ["How much can we boost IQ and scholastic achievement?"](https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED023722.pdf) (1969). An early paper that is largely responsible for initiating much of the debate surrounding racial IQ differences. Jensen argues that we cannot do much to improve population IQ scores or to resolve racial IQ disparities. 
- Charles Murray, [*The Bell Curve*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Bell_Curve) (1994). Highly impactful book that re-ignited much of the debate regarding race and intelligence. Murray illustrates the importance that IQ in a society that relies on information processing and suggests that some of the racial IQ disparities we see are likely to be caused by racial genetic differences.
- Ulric Neisser, ["Intelligence: Knowns and unknowns"](http://psych.colorado.edu/~carey/pdfFiles/IQ_Neisser2.pdf) (1996). Inspired by the heated debate following the release of *The Bell Curve*, the Board of Scientific Affairs of the American Psychological Association established a task force of experts on intelligence to prepare an authoritative report surveying the current state of the field. The report was continually revised and discussed until the report received unanimous support from each member of the task force. 
- Christopher Jencks and Meredith Phillips, [*The Black-White Test Score Gap*](https://www.brookings.edu/book/the-black-white-test-score-gap/) (1998). A comprehensive collection of works outlining the history, causes and impacts of Black-White test score gaps. The first chapter can be found [here](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/9780815746096_chapter1.pdf).
- J. Philippe Rushton and Arthur R. Jensen, ["Thirty years of research on race differences in cognitive ability"](http://www1.udel.edu/educ/gottfredson/30years/Rushton-Jensen30years.pdf) (2005). An interpretation of the main data relevant to the Black-White IQ gap, arguing in favor of a primarily genetic explanation of the Black-White IQ gap. 
- Richard E. Nisbett, ["A Commentary on Rushton and Jensen"](http://www1.udel.edu/educ/gottfredson/30years/Nisbett-commentary-on-30years.pdf) (2005). An environmentalist objection to the claims and analysis from Rushton and Jensen from "Thirty years of research".
- J. Philippe Rushton and Arthur R. Jensen, ["Wanted: More Race Realism, Less Moralistic Fallacy"](https://www1.udel.edu/educ/gottfredson/30years/Rushton-Jensen-reply-to-commentaries-on-30years.pdf) (2005). A response to the objections from Nisbett in "A Commentary on Rushton and Jensen" and other environmentalist criticisms.
- Richard E. Nisbett, ["Intelligence: New Findings and Theoretical Developments"](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/c03f/f20904c35a370534a9d3710453dd6dc7a2d2.pdf) (2012). An authoritative review of the field of intelligence by experts in the field to update the "Intelligence: Knowns and unknowns" (1996) article,  surveying many of the facts discovered since the publication of the original article.
- Drew Thomas, ["Racial IQ Differences among Transracial Adoptees: Fact or Artifact?"](https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d17/tables/dt17_221.90.asp) (2017). A critical analysis of currently available transracial adoption studies, addressing some methodological flaws of previous interpretations of the data.s