# The Expressivist Challenge

## Alleged Dilemma of Descriptivism

Expressivism denies (1) that moral judgments express beliefs, and (2) that moral judgments are capable of truth. Rather, moral judgments express a speaker's (dispositions to have) attitudes of approval and disapproval, which are incapable of being true or false. We will consider Ayer's argument for expressivism, which comes from considering the only two forms of descriptivism - naturalism and non-naturalism.

Naturalism defines ethical terms in the form of non-ethical terms, e.g. utilitarian theories define goodness in terms of pleasure, happiness, satisfaction, etc; subjectivist theories define goodness in terms of the approval of certain individuals or societies. However, such analysis cannot be correct because for any naturalistic property 'N', it is never *self-contradictory* to say that N is sometimes not good. But this is impossible if there were such a naturalistic property 'N' that 'good' could be defined in terms of. Thus, there is no such naturalistic property 'N' to define 'good', which means naturalism is false.

Non-naturalism maintains that ethical concepts are irreducible to empirical concepts. Such a theory must maintain that ethical concepts are controlled by an "intellectual intuitionism". But such a theory cannot be emprically verifiable. Clearly, certain things may seem intuitive to some people but not to others, and there is no verifiable method to choose whose intuitions to trust. Since non-naturalism mantains that ethical propositions are genuine synthetic propositions which are not empirically verifiable, non-naturalism must be false (since, according to Ayer, all meaningful synthetic propositions are empirically verifiable).

## Non-Naturalism

Ayer's objection to non-naturalism is problematic because it depends on the merits of a controverisal theory of meaning - logical positivism. But there are other problems with non-naturalism that Ayer never mentioned. Ayer's general criticism against non-naturalism was its barren epistemology, and this can be revealed independent of logical positivism, as Simon Blackburn pointed did. 

If we are to enrich our ontology with special entities (i.e. moral facts), we need to have some method of accessing such facts, but non-naturalism seems to have no adequate answer (independent of logical positivism). The only epistemic method for learning of moral facts seems to be some sort of intuitive faculty analogous to *causal perceptual awareness* (independent moral facts *cause* perceptions that product moral judgments). The problem is this cannot explain a plattitude of moral reasoning: the *supervenience* of the moral on the natural. Everyone agrees that the moral properties of an entity *supervenes* on that entity's natural properties. Moreover, everyone agrees that this is an *a priori* truth. Recognition of the supervience of the moral on the non-moral is a constraint on the proper use of moral concepts.

Intuition is incompatible with supervenience because it cannot explain how merely *perceiving* that a certain entity with natural properties N and moral properties M can explain the *a priori* truth that all entities with natural properties N also have moral properties M. One possible explanation might be to say that after witnessing the coinstantiation of N and M and one circumstance, we generalize to other cases. But this faces two problems. 

1. It doesn't explain why it's an *a priori* truth. Just because one has perceived properties N and M together in one circumstances does not *guarantee* that properties N and M are *always* coinstantiated. Instead, this would be an inductive argument yielding a *contingent* and *a posteriori* truth. 
2. Moral reasoning very often involves *imagined* or *described* situations, not *perceived* situations. We form moral judgments about these imagine situations via general standards. But how can we *perceive* the applicability of general standards? How can we *perceive* the timelessness and universality of these general standards? And how can they be guaranteed a priori? It seems that a causal perceptual explanation of moral judgments cannot explain the cases where we form judgments about an imagined situation that could not have *caused* any of our judgments.

## Metaphysical (Synthetic) Naturalism
 
*Property identity rather than conceptual identity*. One response to Ayer denies that naturalism is a metaphysical thesis rather than a definitional thesis. It is a claim about property identities, not a claim about definitional identities. Thus, it could be possible that moral property M and natural property N are identical, whereby this would be a non-analytic (synthetic), *a posteriori*, necessary identity.

*Reference-fixing descriptions succeed with color terms*. A similar strategy can be done by identifying color properties with certain surface reflectance properties. This identity need not be definitional, and can be handled in the way we handle proper names. For example, we could say that the word "red" refers to the surface reflectance property of objects that is causally responsible for our usage of the word red. This would be identifying the *property* redness with some surface reflectance property, but it would not be to identifying the *concepts* of redness with any surface reflectance property (surely, our *concepts* of redness was prior to any concepts of surface reflectance properties regarding light wavelengths). The general strategy to give a property identity of X is to posit a reference fixing description of X, which allows us to learn *a posteriori* which property that picks out that description and therefore X.

*Reference-fixing descriptions fail with moral terms*. This strategy fails for moral terms because naturalists would have to choose a description to fix the reference of moral terms. However, they must do so in a way that moral terms do not have different content in different contexts. But this is impossible if, for example, moral terms are used to refer to the naturalistic feature of properties that are causally responsible for our usage of those moral terms. It's possible that two persons' (or two societies') uses of moral terms are caused by different naturalistic properties. In that case, when these two persons or societies use moral terms different (say, to criticize each other), then they wouldn't even be disagreeing (i.e. their assertions would not be incompatible), because their terms would have different referents. This is promotes a radical relativism, which is inconsistent with the *objectivity* of morality.

## Conceptual Analysis

*Parodox of Analysis*. Ayer's argument against definitional naturalism was the Open Question Argument: (1) for natural property N it is coherent to entertain the possibility to N is or is not identical to any normative property M, (2) if it is coherent to entertain the possibility that N and M are not identical, then N and M are not conceptually identical, (3) therefore there is no natural property which is conceptually identical to any normative property M. The problem with this argument is the 2nd premise (2). It is a common fact about analyses that concept X may constitute a correct analysis of concept Y despite it being possible to coherently entertain whether something that fits the criteria of X also fits the criteria of Y (or vice versa). This is known as the Parodox of Analysis (that a conceptual analysis can be analytic while also unobvious informative) and is common to all of philosophy. Consider some possibilities: (i) the concept of being red and the concept of having properties that cause the appearance of redness, (ii) the concept of knowledge and the concept of justified true belief, (iii) the concept of intentional actions and the concept of actions motivated by desire.

*Plattitude Encapsulation*. Ayer and Moore misunderstood the purpose of conceptual analysis. An analysis of a concept is successful if it encapsulates all and only plattitudes which are necessary to come to have mastery of that concept. This is not to say that if someone is a master of the concept that they will be aware of these plattitudes off the top of their head. Rather, these plattitudes must capture the inferential and judgmental dispositions of those who do in fact have mastery of the concept. Such an analysis should provide the means to learn everything there is to know *a priori* about the concept. This can explain the Parodox of Analysis. Even though someone who has mastery of a concept must *have* certain inferential and judgment dispositions, it may not be transparent what those inferential and judgmental dispositions *are*. Thus, one need not know what the best systematization of the plattitudes that describe those dispositions is. Whereas mastery of a concept requires knowledge*-how*, mastery of an analysis requires knowledge-*that*. A similar phenomenon can be found with grammatical norms (e.g. order of adjectives), or even implicit societal norms that regulate behavior (e.g. conversational distance).

Some plattitudes of the color red include "the redness of objects cause us to see them as red", "red is more similar to orange than to green", "prototypical examples are needed to teach redness", etc. These would be a summary-style analysis of "red" instead of a straightforward dictionary-style definition.

The plattitudes about the concept of 'rightness', descriptions of the inferences and judgments that a mster of the concept is disposed to make, include the following: (1) *practicality*: if A judges X-ing to be right, then A has some motivation to X (assuming they are rational), (2) *objectivity*: if A judges X-ing to be right and B judges X-ing to not be right, then at least one of them are incorrect, (3) *supervenience*: acts with the same non-moral features have the same moral features, (4) *substance*: right acts are concerned with human flourishing, are expressive of equal concern and respect, etc. and (5) *procedure*: moral arguments have a coherentist form (i.e. reflective equilibrium); when two parties have different moral judgments, they tend to try to resolve the disagreement by appeal to more general moral principles that they can agree to.

## Reductive Definitional (Analytic) Naturalism

*Failure of reductive definitions thus far*. The naturalistic analysis pondered by Ayer do fail because they miss some key plattitudes of moral terms. Subjective definitional naturalism can capture moral supervenience and the practicality of morality, but not the objectivity. Non-subjective definitional naturalism can capture moral supervenience and the objectivity of morality, but not the practicality. But there can be other possibilities for a reductive definitional analysis.

*Network Anlyses*. A non-reductive dispositional analysis is just one kind of definitional naturalistic analysis. Another analysis could be a network analysis. A network analysis of moral terms is a reductive, explicit (i.e. non-summary style) analysis that simply says that moral properties are the natural properties that are related to each other in the ways that moral plattitudes purport (if such natural properties do exist). It doesn't follow that there are any moral properties, for there may not be any natural properties that meet the plattitudes demanded by morality.

*Permutation Problem*. Network analyses about a realm of concepts can face a permutation problem in that they risk being unable to explain the uniqueness of certain properties. For example, on a network analysis of colors, color properties would be reduced to natural properties that stand in relation to each other in a manner appropriate for the plattitudes of colors (i.e. red objects are just those that appear red, oranage those that appear to be orange, etc.). The problem is that there may be a property that stands in set of relations isomorphic to the set of relations that red stands in to, but this property could equally well be isomorphic to orange, or green, etc. And so it wouldn't be able to distinguish *which* properties were which color. There are no *a priori* plattitudes that can fix exactly which physical properties ground which color properties (plattitudes like "red is the color of blood" is not an *a priori* plattitude.

*Failure to capture a posteriori paradigmatic learned exemplars of a concept*. The problem with network analyses regarding colors is that we learn many of our colors *a posteriori* via paradigmatic examples of physical properties that exhibit certain colors. These are not any *a priori* plattitudes central to our color concepts. This is why network analyses fail concerning colors. But the same issue arises for moral terms. Our moral terms are highly interconnected and dependent on each other. We learn of rightness and wrongness, good and bad procedures, etc. by reference to *a posteriori* paradigmatic examples of things with those features. This cannot be met by a reductive, explicit network analysis.

The only solution to avoid the expressivist challenge is to provide a non-reductive, summary-style naturalistic analysis of moral concepts. This shall be given later.