[Affirmative Action (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/affirmative-action/)

[Hasnas: Equal opportunity, affirmative action, and... - Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?cluster=11540508544729203055&hl=en&as_sdt=0,48)

[Rosenfeld: Affirmative Action, Justice, and Equalities:... - Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?cluster=11636351808541605373&hl=en&as_sdt=0,48)

# A defense of Affirmative Action

[Thomas Nagel (1981)](http://ojs2.gmu.edu/PPPQ/article/viewFile/1258/1006) distinguishes between two forms of affirmative action. "Weak" affirmative action refers to "to special efforts to ensure equal opportunity for members of groups that had been subject to discrimination". This can include public advertisement of positions to be filled, active recruitment of qualified applicants from the formerly excluded groups, and special training programs to help them meet the standards for admission or appointment. "Strong" affirmative action refers to "some degree of definite preference for members of these groups in determining access to positions from which they were formerly excluded." The "weak" vs "strong" distinction has also been referred to as the "minimalist" vs "maximalist" distinction [(Beauchamp 1998)]([http://homepage.westmont.edu/hoeckley/readings/symposium/PDF/301_400/358.pdf](http://homepage.westmont.edu/hoeckley/readings/symposium/PDF/301_400/358.pdf)) or the "procedural" vs "preferential" distinction. As Nagel and Beauchamp note, most people agree that "weak" or "procedural" affirmative action is justified (and perhaps even morally obligatory). However, there is significant controversy regarding "strong" or "preferential" forms of affirmative action. In this post, I will defend "strong or "preferential" affirmative action. Whenever I refer to "affirmative action" for the rest of this post, it will always be in reference to this strong or preferential form. A few clarifications are in order before proceeding. 
* Firstly, my goal is to defend affirmative action as practiced by the admissions officers of colleges and universities specifically (as opposed to employers and other organizations). 
* Secondly, when I refer to affirmative action, I will specifically refer to affirmative action based on *race*, i.e. admissions policies that give preferential treatment to underrepresented minorities, or URMs. 
* Thirdly, my defense of affirmative action is only intended to defend from charges that affirmative action is an unjust form of *racial discrimination*. I will argue that, while affirmative action *does* discriminate against the members of overrepresented racial groups, it is not an *unjust* form of discrimination. Of course, affirmative action might be opposed for other reasons (e.g. perhaps it is empirically ineffective), but that is not my concern here. 
* Lastly, I'm only concerned with affirmative action within the United States.

There are three main arguments commonly invoked to defend affirmative action [(Tierney 1997)]([https://www.researchgate.net/profile/William_Tierney/publication/249797704_The_Parameters_of_Affirmative_Action_Equity_and_Excellence_in_the_Academy/links/545118e40cf285a067c681f8.pdf](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/William_Tierney/publication/249797704_The_Parameters_of_Affirmative_Action_Equity_and_Excellence_in_the_Academy/links/545118e40cf285a067c681f8.pdf)). 
1. The *compensatory* argument states that URMs should be granted preferential treatment by colleges and universities to compensate for past or historical discrimination against them or members of their racial group. See [Thompson (1973)]([https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/2265014.pdf?seq=1](https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/2265014.pdf?seq=1)) for some compensatory arguments (although her argument focused on the hiring decisions of employers). 
2. The *diversity* argument justifies affirmative action based on the benefits of a more racially diverse student body (e.g. the benefit from being exposed to members of different races). See [Nagel (1981)](http://ojs2.gmu.edu/PPPQ/article/viewFile/1258/1006) and [Beauchamp (1998)]([https://scholar.google.com/scholar?cluster=8304057655993507338&hl=en&as_sdt=0,48](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?cluster=8304057655993507338&hl=en&as_sdt=0,48)) for such arguments. 
3. The *corrective* argument claims that preference should be given to URMs in order to better select for the most qualified students (e.g. because a Black student's score on standardized test might be artificially impaired due to disadvantaged schooling, stereotype threat, etc.). See [Himma (2001)]([http://link.springer.com/article/10.1023/A:1006401619357](http://link.springer.com/article/10.1023/A:1006401619357)) for some corrective arguments.

There are strong objections to each of these arguments, but I will not be considering any of these objections here (see [Tierney (1997)](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/William_Tierney/publication/249797704_The_Parameters_of_Affirmative_Action_Equity_and_Excellence_in_the_Academy/links/545118e40cf285a067c681f8.pdf) for some objections). I won't be considering any of these objections because I will not (directly) use any of the aforementioned arguments. Instead, I will provide two seperate arguments in defense of affirmative action that are based on principles that I believe almost all people accept. The first is an argument based on analogy with preferential treatment to students from low socioeconomic statuses. (1) preferential treatment based on socioeconomic status, and (2) preferential treatment based on non-academic qualities. These two other forms of preferential treatment, I will argue, are relevantly similar to preferential treatment based on race. If I'm correct about this, then if we continue to defend these two other forms of preferential treatment, then we have strong reason to also defend preferential treatment based on race. 

## Preferential treatment based on socioeconomic status

My first argument to defend affirmative action is based on an analogy with preferential treatment to prospective students from lower socioeconomic statuses (SES). The basic structure for this first argument is based on the following:

1. We ought to support preferential treatment based on SES.
2. If we ought to support preferential treatment based on SES, then we also ought to support preferential treatment based on race.
3. Therefore, we ought to support preferential treatment based on race.

I do not believe that a substantial defense of premise 1 is needed. The majority of people believe that universities should grant preferential treatment to low-SES students. A 2016 Gallup poll shows that [61% of Americans]([https://news.gallup.com/poll/193508/oppose-colleges-considering-race-admissions.aspx](https://news.gallup.com/poll/193508/oppose-colleges-considering-race-admissions.aspx)) believe that a student's economic circumstances be a factor in college admissions. Also, a 2018 [Boston-based poll]([https://dailyfreepress.com/2018/09/21/americans-favor-diversity-on-college-campuses-according-to-boston-based-poll/](https://dailyfreepress.com/2018/09/21/americans-favor-diversity-on-college-campuses-according-to-boston-based-poll/)) found that [83% of Americans]([https://www.wgbh.org/news/education/2018/09/16/wgbh-news-higher-education-poll-top-line-data](https://www.wgbh.org/news/education/2018/09/16/wgbh-news-higher-education-poll-top-line-data)) believe that colleges should consider whether a prospective student has overcome hardships such as poverty or health problems in admissions decisions. Because the majority of people already agree that we should support preferential treatment for students from low-SES backgrounds, I will not spend time defending premise 1. Instead, I will be assuming most people's intuitions are correct here: we ought to support preferential treatment to low-SES students.

The controversial premise of the argument is premise 2. My argument for premise 2 will be as follows.

* If we ought to support preferential treatment based on SES status and if the justification of this preferential treatment also applies to race, then we also ought to support preferential treatment based on race.
* The justification of preferential treatment based on SES also applies to race.
* Therefore, if we ought to support preferential treatment based on SES, then we also ought to support preferential treatment based on race.

Again, I don't think the first premise here requires much support. It basically amounts to saying we should treat like cases alike. If two behaviors are equally justified, and if we ought to perform one of the behaviors, then we also ought to perform the other. I very much doubt anyone rejects this. So the conversy is around the second premise: the justification of preferential treatment to low-SES also applies to URMs. To evaluate this claim, first we must become determine what is the justification for preferential treatment to low-SES students. 

It seems to me that the justification of preferential treatment to low-SES students is the fact that such students are _disadvantaged_. In fact, when people object to affirmative action, rarely do they deny that disadvantaged students should be given preferential treatment. Rather, the objection is almost always to propose SES-based preferential treatment as a superior method to account for a student's disadvantage. Now, the question is whether URMs are also disadvantaged. It seems quite clear to me that they are, and I doubt anyone would seriously deny this (assuming they also grant that low-SES students are disadvantaged). Whatever metrics one uses to indicate that low-SES students are disadvantaged (e.g. school quality, single parenthood, income, violent neighborhoods, parental education, etc.) apply equally well to URMs. However, some people deny that this justifies preferential treatment based on race in a way that is comparable to SES. The only good rationale for treating race and SES differently is an assumption that the disadvantage faced by URMs is mostly explained by their low-SES status. I will argue that this assumption is actually false, undermining the rationale for treating SES and race differently.

* Before proceeding, I would like to note that my argument here is agnostic with respect to the _cause_ of the disadvantages faced by low-SES students and URMs. Some posit systemic racism, lack of motivation, lack of role models, cultural deficiencies and others even posit genetic explanations. I offer no  _causal_ explanations of the disadvantages here. 

Now, let's evaluate the assumption that the assumption that the disadvantage faced by URMs is mostly explained by their low-SES status. In order to do this, we must do two things. Firstly, we need to determine what evidence supports the claim that low-SES students are relevantly disadvantaged. Secondly, we need to determine whether this evidence also exists for URMs after controlling for SES. If so, we should reject the assumption that the disadvantage faced by URMs is mostly explained by their low-SES status.

1. Firstly, what evidence exists for the claim that low-SES students are disadvantaged in the first place? I mentioned factors like school quality, low income, single parenthood, violent neighborhoods, parental education, etc. But why are these characteristics instances of _disadvantage_? Why not say that wealthier children are disadvantaged because they don't get an opportunity to develop the "perseverance" and "grit" that comes from being poor? Why not say the wealthy are disadvantaged? Now, it becomes an empirical question whether low-SES or high-SES students are disadvantaged. It seems to me that the only good empirical evidence that low-SES students are disadvantaged is the statistical fact that these students tend to score poorly according to traditional admission standards by universities. For example, the fact that low-SES students tend to have poor SAT scores is evidence that these students are relevantly disadvantaged. On the other hand, while there may be some merit to the idea that high-SES students lack "grit" or "perseverance", we know that these students are not disadvantaged _with respect to college admissions_ because they score relatively well on admissions standards. So the empirical evidence for whether a group is disadvantaged reduces to how well that group performs according to traditional admissions standards.
2. Secondly, does this evidence also apply to URMs after controlling for SES? That is, is there evidence that URMs perform poorly according to traditional admissions standards after controlling for SES? The answer is a resounding "Yes". Consider the following data points.

* URMs perform significantly worse on standardized test scores *even after* controlling for SES. For example, most of the Black-White gap in SAT scores remains even after controlling for income. In fact, in 2005, the Black-White gap in SAT scores was 204 points, but the mean SAT score for Whites from families earning less than $10,000 was 129 points higher than the mean SAT score for *all* Blacks [[sourcel](http://www.jbhe.com/features/49_college_admissions-test.html)]. 
* Studies find that racial disparities in other measures of cognitive ability do not shrink much even after controlling for SES. For example, in _The Black-White Test Score Gap_, [Jencks and Phillips (1998)]([https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/9780815746096_chapter1.pdf](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/9780815746096_chapter1.pdf)) measured the scores of Black and White children taking the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT). The Black children scored about 16 points lower than the White children on these tests. However, the authors report that "a two-year reduction in the black-white education gap among mothers would cut the PPVT gap by about a point" (page 22), "eliminating black-white income differences would cut the PPVT gap by less than 1 point" (page 23) and "children who have grown up in an intact family score no higher on the PPVT than children from single-parent families" (page 23). 

So controlling for traditional measures of SES - e.g. income, parental education, family structure, etc. - does not reduce most of the Black-White gap on traditional admissions standards. Thus, we have evidence that the disadvantage experienced by URMs (at least Black students. I assume similar patterns can be found for other URMs) is _not_ mostly explained by their low-SES status. But recall that the only good rationale for treating race and SES differently is an assumption that the disadvantage faced by URMs is mostly explained by their low-SES status. Since this assumption is false, there is no good rationale for treating SES and race differently with regard to preferential treatment by colleges. This suffices to show that premise 2 of my argument is true: if we ought to support preferential treatment based on SES, then we also ought to support preferential treatment based on race. Since premise 1 of my argument is also true - that we ought to support preferential treatment based on SES - the conclusion of my argument follows: we ought to support preferential treatment based on race.

## The freedom to discriminate

My other argument for affirmative action is based on a general freedom to discriminate that I believe all private persons and companies should be afforded. Before giving the arguments, I would like to note two caveats. Firstly, because these freedoms only apply to _private_ entities (governments should not have the same freedom to discriminate that private individuals should have), my argument here is limited to *private* universities. Secondly, this argument only defends the *legal* right to discriminate; it is not sufficient to defend the *moral permissibility* of such discrimination. Call this the *Freedom Argument*. The basic structure is as follows:

1. We ought to grant private entities the legal freedom to discriminate based on any features that they prefer, except in cases where we are provided with sufficiently strong reasons to override this freedom.
2. We have not been provided with sufficiently strong reason to override a private universities' freedom to discriminate prospective students based on race. 
3. Therefore, we ought to grant private universities the freedom to discriminate prospective students based on race (i.e. affirmative action).

### Burden of proof

Like my first argument, it seems to me that the first premise of the *Freedom Argument* does not require much defense. Note that this premise does not imply that all instances of discrimination ought to be permitted. This premise only establishes that in a moral dispute concerning whether to legally permit an instance of discrimination, the party in favor of outlawing such discrimination has the "burden of proof" to provide sufficiently strong reasons to deny this freedom. This principle is similar to the "[presumption of innocence]([https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Presumption_of_innocence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Presumption_of_innocence))" legal principle. The prosecutor in a criminal case has to prove "beyond a reasonable doubt" that the defendent is guilty. It is not the defendant's job to prove that they're innocent. In the absence of sufficient proof from the prosecutor, we should judge the defendent as not guilty, i.e. the defendent is "innocent until proven guilty". Likewise, the first principle of my argument here should be read as a "presumption of freedom". In the absence of sufficiently strong reasons to deny a private entity the freedom to practice a certain form of discrimination, we ought to legally permit the discrimination.

This first premise must be accepted for essentially any private corportation to feasibly operate. All employers discriminate between applicants on the basis of skill, knowledge, traits, etc. Universities also discriminate on the basis of academic achievement, intelligence, extra-curricular activities, athletic ability, etc. We need to be given strong reasons before we outlaw a particular form of discrimination, but we do not need strong reasons before we legally permit a particular form of discrimination. Again, I doubt that most people oppose this first premise, so I will not spend more time defending it. 

The controversy, then, concerns the truth of premise 2, i.e. whether we have been provided with sufficiently strong reason to restrict private universities' freedom to discriminate prospective students based on race. I will do so by considering a variety of the strongest reasons (that I've seen) which attempt to justify restricting a private university's freedom to practice affirmative action. In the end, I will argue that all such reasons fail. None of these reasons meet the "burden of proof" required to justify restricting a private universtiy's freedom to practice affirmative action. If I'm correct, this means premise 2 of my _Freedom Argument_ is true. This means that the conclusion of my argument follows: we ought to grant private universities the freedom to discriminate prospective students based on race (i.e. practice affirmative action).

### Bad reasons

Let's begin by considering some obviously bad reasons to justify outlawing affirmative action.

1. Affirmative action is against the law. This is a straightforwardly bad argument from legality which can be easily dismissed. The fact that the law permits or forbids certain conduct does not demonstrate that such conduct _should_ be permitted or forbidden. To say otherwise implies that the law should never change, which is absurd. I'm sure I don't need to list examples of laws that should (or should have been) changed.
2. The public disaproves of affirmative action. This argument is bad because society can be _wrong_ in their approval or disapproval. To say otherwise implies that society should never change its current norms for approval or disapproval, which is clearly absurd. Again, I need not list examples where society should change (or should have changed) its norms for approval and disapproval. But even if society is correct to disapprove of affirmative action, that does not imply that affirmative action should be banned. For example, society should disapprove of adulterers, but this does not imply that adultery should be illegal.
3. Universities benefit heavily from the government. The reasoning goes as follows: private universities (and other private institutions) benefit from the government because in the form of government-subsidized police protection, military protection, economic regulations, etc. all of which are necessary for such institutions to prosper. Therefore, the government is permitted to ban private institutions from practicing affirmative action (or discriminating against any of the "protected classes" that the government decides). This is a really bad argument. A similar argument can be used to show that the government is permitted to ban, say, interracial marriage. After all, private _individuals_ benefit from the government just as much as private companies. Further, surely there are _some_ aspects of an institution's conduct that should _not_ be controlled by the government (e.g. whether a sports apparel store sells basketball jerseys or football jerseys). These examples show that the fact that the government provides a benefit over an entity does not tell us _how_ the government should regulate that entity. 
4. Affirmative Action is racial discrimination. In response to this argument, some deny that affirmative action is a form of racial discrimination. I will not deny this as it is an obvious truth on any straightforward definition of "discrimination". The actual problem with this argument is that there are plenty of instances of racial discrimination that should not be forbidden. For example, casting directors for movies and plays constantly discriminate prospective actors and actresses constantly based on race. Surely, these are forms of racial discrimination that should not be banned.

These are all bad reasons. None of these are sufficiently strong reasons to deny a university's general freedom to discriminate. None of the arguments here meet the "burden of proof" required to justify restricting this general freedom.

### Arbitrariness

Now someone might respond by saying that affirmative action ought to be opposed because race is an _arbitrary_ feature with respect to university admissions. Private universities are only trying to sell a quality education, and the racial makeup of a campus's student body has no direct influence on the quality of the education of its students. Call this the *Arbitrariness Argument* against affirmative action. The argument can be put roughly as follows. 

1. Race is an arbitrary trait of prospective university students.
2. All instances of discrimination based on arbitrary traits should be illegal.
3. Affirmative action involves discrimination based on the race of prospective students. 
4. Therefore, affirmative action should be illegal.

The *Arbitrariness Argument* seems intuitive. It explains why it seems that racial discrimination should almost always be illegal. The reason is that racial discrimination is almost always arbitrary. Most jobs require you to apply manual labor or process information, which usually has nothing to do with race. But if we imagine cases where race _is_ a relevant characteristic (e.g. casting or movie directors), we see that racial discrimination ought to be legal. This argument can also explain why discrimination seems so wrong when it has nothing to do with race. For example, it can explain why it seems wrong for a company to discriminate against a candidate based on, say, blood type, assuming blood type is an arbitrary feature with respect to the position.

To address the *Arbitrariness Argument*, we must first clearly define what is meant by "arbitrary". Let us do so by considering the following scenario. Imagine an employer, Evan, must choose between two candidates for a job, Mark and Lewis. Mark is more qualified than Lewis. However, based on interviews with both candidates, Evan predicts that Lewis, while less qualified, will be considerably more pleasant to be around than Mark because Lewis has a more compatible personality. So Evan hires Lewis over Mark. I believe most people believe that this form of preferential treatment by Evan should be legal, so I will not spend any time defending Evan's right to make this decision. Instead, I will assume that most people's intuitions here are correct: the preferential treatment by Evan should *not* be illegal. The question is whether the preferential treatment by Evan is *arbitrary*. More specifically, the question is whether the pleasantness of Lewis is an arbitrary trait with respect to his position (using the definition of "arbitrary" as it is used in the *Arbitrariness Argument*). There are two possible answers: either Lewis's pleasantness *is* an arbitrary trait, or Lewis's pleasantness is *not* an arbitrary trait. Either answer, I will argue, implies that the *Arbitrariness Argument* is unsound.

1. The first possible answer is that Lewis's pleasantness *is* an arbitrary trait. However, if that is true, then Evan's choice of Lewis over Mark would be an instance of arbitrary discrimination that ought not be forbidden. This means that not all instances of discrimination based on arbitrary traits ought to be illegal, which means premise 2 of the *Arbitrariness Argument* is false, rendering the argument unsound.
2. The second posssible answer is that Lewis's pleasantness is *not* an arbitrary trait. The natural response now is to demand an explanation as to *why* Lewis's pleasantness is not an arbitrary trait. After all, Lewis was the lesser qualified candidate. What else could we mean by "arbitrary trait" if not a trait that does not influence a candidate's qualification?

	a. One explanation is to say that Lewis's pleasantness is not an arbitrary trait because what makes a trait arbitrary just depends on the preference of the private entity. So, on this explanation, if an employer has a preference for trait X (where X is intelligence, strength, productivity, or even pleasantness), then X is, by definition, not arbitrary. The problem with this argument is it implies that no preference by a private entity is ever arbitrary. This means that race is *not* an arbitrary trait of prospective students for universities that practice affirmative action, since such universities clearly have a preference for students of a certain race. This implies that premise 1 of the *Arbitrariness Argument* is false, rednering the argument unsound.
	
	b. An alternative explanation for why Lewis's pleasantness is not an arbitrary trait is as follows: Lewis's pleasantness is not an arbitrary trait because the pleasantness of a company's employees advances the company's *economic interests*. Perhaps more pleasant employees improves the mood of other workers, which in turn promotes employee productivity. Let's assume this explanation is adequate. The problem is, if we accept this explanation, then race would _not_ be an arbitrary trait of prospective university students. The racial makeup of a university's campus *does* advance the university's economic interests. This is because private universities don't aim to merely sell libraries and lectures; they also aim to offer a college campus with an "atmosphere" that is appealing to a certain market of prospective students. For example, universities commonly promote "racially diverse" campuses to prospective students. In fact, [86% of Americans]([https://dailyfreepress.com/2018/09/21/americans-favor-diversity-on-college-campuses-according-to-boston-based-poll/](https://dailyfreepress.com/2018/09/21/americans-favor-diversity-on-college-campuses-according-to-boston-based-poll/)) believe it is at least somewhat important to strive for an ethnically diverse student body at universities. In other words, students are not just the *consumers* of a university; they also play a direct role in creating the _the product_ (in the same way that actors and actresses are related to movies and plays). Thus, if we accept this second explanation for why Lewis's plesantness is not an arbitrary trait (because pleasantness advances the company's economic interests), then *race* is also not an arbitrary trait of prospective university students (because racial diversity advances a university's economic interests). This implies that premise 1 of the *Arbitrariness Argument* is false, rendering the argument unsound. 

There may be alternative explanations for why Lewis's pleasantness is not an arbitrary trait. However, it seems to me that the two explanations that I have considered are the most plausible explanations. If that's right, then on the most plausible explanation for why Lewis's pleasantness is not an arbitrary trait, the *Arbitrariness Argument* is unsound. On the other hand, as I argued earlier, if Lewis's pleasantness *is* an arbitrary trait, then the *Arbitrariness Argument* would still be unsound. Thus, we should conclude that the *Arbitrariness Argument* is unsound.

Since the _Arbitrariness Argument_ is unsound, it obviously fails to meet the burden presented by the _Freedom Argument_ that I gave earlier. If this still seems unintuitive, consider the fact that many universities already practice a similar form of discrimination in the form of sex-based discrimination. The most extreme form of discrimination of this kind comes from women’s colleges and men’s colleges, universities that only allow students of a certain sex. Many other colleges also perform sex-based discrimination for the opposite goal, to maintain a roughly even male:female on campus. Most do not believe that such institutions should be outlawed. The reason is that the sexual makeup of the student campus is clearly an essential part of the product that these colleges wish to sell, which means the sex of the students is not arbitrary. I see no reason to treat race-based discrimination (i.e. affirmative action) any differently.

### Deprivation

In the previous section, I argued that the _Arbitrariness Argument_ fails because affirmative action is not arbitrary because the racial makeup of a university's campus is relevant to the university's economic goals. In actuality, I don't believe that arbitrariness matters at all. Even if race is a completely arbitrary trait of prospective students, private universities should still be permitted to practice affirmative action. Why should a private institution not be permitted to discriminate on arbitrary grounds? After all, these institutions are (and should be) permitted to make all kinds of arbitrary decisions. For example, a sports apparel store decision to sell basketball versus football sportswear, a baker's decision to sell strawberry versus chocolate cake, a restuarant's decision to offer hamburgers versus tacos, etc. could very well be arbitrary decisions. Assuming these are all arbitrary decisions, should the government force the company to make a particular choice? Of course not.

So what makes arbitrary decisions regarding _discrimination_ special? Why treat this differently than the countless other arbitrary decisions that companies make? I believe the answer is that discrimination can cause the perpetual deprivation of disenfranchised (usually minority) populations. If there is rampant discrimination against a particular group, then this can leave the group without adequate access to vital resources such as healthcare, education, occupation, housing, etc. In fact, I believe that our strong intuitions against discrimination (especially racial discrimination) are explained by an implicit association between discrimination and deprivation due to the troubled history of minorities (particular Black people) in America.  If not for this troubled history (and the potential of repeating this history), I believe we would not treat arbitrary discrimination any differently than any other arbitrary decision that companies constantly make. 

I actually agree with the importance of deprivation with regard to discrimination. In fact, I believe that the fact that an instance of discrimination can cause rampant deprivation meets the "burden of proof" demanded by the _Freedom Argument_. Avoiding immense suffering to a particular group certainly constitutes sufficiently strong reason to override a private entity's general freedom to discriminate. This suggests that there isn't anything inherently problematic about arbitrary discrimination that warrants banning it. Rather, it's the association with systemic deprivation that matters. This suggests a standard that must be met to justify outlawing a particular form of discrimination, namely whether that form of discrimination will likely result in immense deprivation for a particular group. If forms of discrimination deprive a certain group of vital resources, then such discrimination should be restricted (regardless of whether the discrimination is arbitrary). On the other hand, if forms of discrimination does _not_ deprive any group of vital resources, then such discrimination should _not_ be restricted (regardless of whether the discrimination is arbitrary). 

Under this standard, it seems quite clear to me that affirmative action by private universities _should_ be permitted. The students who are rejected admissions into universities due to affirmative action almost certainly will not experience immense deprivation as a result. This is because most colleges are not very selective. In fact, [most colleges admit most of their applicants]([https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/04/09/a-majority-of-u-s-colleges-admit-most-students-who-apply/](https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/04/09/a-majority-of-u-s-colleges-admit-most-students-who-apply/)). So the students who are rejected admissions due to affirmative action are primarily students who were rejected by fairly elite universities. These students - i.e. those who _would_ have been accepted into an elite university if not for affirmative action - overwhelmingly come from upper and upper middle class households and usually remain in those economic circumstances during adulthood. These rejected students tend to resort to attending either other elite universities or slightly less selective universities. If there is any systemic, aggregate "harm" to these students, it is relatively minor, e.g. instead of rising to the _upper upper_ middle class, they "merely" rise to the _upper_ middle class. This "harm" does not meet the "burden of proof" demanded by the _Freedom Argument_. The fact that fairly wealthy students are made slightly less wealthy due to affirmative action is not sufficiently strong reason to restrict a private university's general freedom to discriminate.

## Conclusion

Let's summarize the points made here. First, I presented my _Freedom Argument_. Then I considered some straightforwardly bad arguments earlier in this section that I believe fail to meet this burden. The *Racial Discrimination Argument*, for example, is unsound because there are plenty of instances of discrimination based on race that ought not be forbidden. Deprivation, on the other hand, can justify restricting a private institution's general right to discriminate, but the students who are rejected from universities due to affirmative action do not undergo significant levels of deprivation.

There are, of course, other arguments that could be provided to meet the burden presented in the first premise of the *Freedom Argument*. However, I believe I have considered the most common and plausible arguments for why private universities ought not be granted the freedom to practice affirmative action. I have argued that all such arguments fail. If that's correct, then private universities ought to be granted the freedom to practice affirmative action, at least until we are provided with a new argument that provides sufficiently strong reason to restrict this freedom.

This concludes my defense of affirmative action. Recall from my introduction that this was a "defense" in a fairly limited sense. My goal here was merely to show that affirmative action is not an unjust form of discrimination. If affirmative action ought to be opposed, it is not _because_ it's an unjust form of discrimination. However, affirmative action may very well be worth opposing for other reasons. For example, there is [controversy]([https://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2012/10/the-painful-truth-about-affirmative-action/263122/](https://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2012/10/the-painful-truth-about-affirmative-action/263122/)) regarding whether URMs are actually harmed by affirmative action because of "mismatch theory", which is the idea that affirmative action beneficiaries are inserted into academic environments that teach "above" their ability or preparedness. I make no claims about whether affirmative action ought to be opposed on these grounds. The purpose of this post was merely to argue that affirmative action should not be opposed on the grounds that it is an unjust form of discrimination.


# Intel

For

Arguments:

Compensatory: compensate historical discrimination/disadvantage (past)
Corrective: compensate present discrimination/disadvantage (present)
Diversity: (in university or in society) (future)

[A Defense of Affirmative Action](http://scholar.googleusercontent.com/scholar?q=cache:KQGIuoeO8_sJ:scholar.google.com/+affirmative+action+philosophy&hl=en&as_sdt=0,48) - Most people would agree that weak or precautionary affirmative action is a good thing, and worth its cost in time and energy. But this does not imply that strong affirmative action is also justified. I shall claim that in the present state of things it is justified, most clearly with respect to blacks...My own view is that while strong affirmative action is intrinsically undesirable, it is a legitimate and perhaps indispensable method of pursuing a goal so important to the national welfare that it can be justified as a temporary, though not short-term, policy for both public and private institutions. In this respect it is like other policies that impose burdens on some for the public good (diversity, "Nagel, by contrast, argued that preferences might work a kind of social good, and without doing violence to justice. Institutions could for one or another good reason properly depart from standard meritocratic selection criteria because the whole system of tying economic reward to earned credentials was itself indefensible.").

Thomson, Judith Jarvis, 1973, “Preferential Hiring,”     Philosophy & Public Affairs, 2 (Summer): 364–384. (compensatory, "Thomson endorsed job preferences for women and African-Americans as a form of redress for their past exclusion from the academy and the workplace.")

[In defense of Affirmative Action](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?cluster=8304057655993507338&hl=en&as_sdt=0,48) - Affirmative action refers to positive steps taken to hire persons from groups previously and presently discriminated against. Considerable evidence indicates that this discrimination is intractable and cannot be eliminated by the enforcement of laws. Numerical goals and quotas are justified if and only if they are necessary to overcome the discriminatory effects that could not otherwise be eliminated with reasonable efficiency. Many past as well as present policies are justified in this way. (diversity)

[Tierney: The parameters of affirmative action: Equity... - Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?cluster=5377782310365330956&hl=en&as_sdt=0,48) - This article provides a historical, philosophical, and theoretical analysis of affirmative action in higher education. It begins with the historical basis for affirmative action and the rationale for why it has been needed. The author outlines the philosophy behind affirmative action and its legal ramifications. The article then evaluates the success of affirmative action, outlines the criticisms that have been made of it, and considers alternatives. It is argued that affirmative action goes to the heart of what we mean by public higher education and what we mean by "merit." Although the policy has not succeeded in creating dramatic improvements, it has been consistent with basic assumptions about the meaning of academic community (good overview of arguments; expressed my position as well).

[Discrimination and Disidentification: The Fair-Start Defense of Affirmative Action](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1023/A:1006401619357) - The Fair-Start Defense justifies affirmative action preferences as a response to harms caused by race- and sex-based discrimination. Rather than base a justification for preferences on the traditional appeal to self-esteem, I argue they are justified in virtue of the effects institutional discrimination has on the goals and aspirations of its victims. In particular, I argue that institutional discrimination puts women and blacks at an unfair competitive disadvantage by causing academic disidentification. Affirmative action is justified as a means of negating this unfair disadvantage (corrective).

Against


[Eastland: The Case Against Affirmative Action - Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?cluster=2734765699087866598&hl=en&as_sdt=0,48) - Merely touting the successes of affirmative action, of course, is to glance at only one side of the ledger. On the other side are substantial costs. When examined in terms of both theory and practice, affirmative action deserves a negative judgment. Affirmative action cannot remain a way of life unless we wish to change for the worse the very essence of what it means to be an American (supported class-based AA; mentions rights-based arguments?).

[Preferential Policies Have Become Toxic](http://www.academia.edu/download/15630539/20110315163924748.pdf#page=72) - What is keeping such [affirmative action] programs in place in spite of growing opposition to them is largely a combination of institutional inertia and a feeling on the part of many people that to favor affirmative action for women and people of color is to be on the side of the angels. I don’t think this is true. The arguments in favor of preferential policies do not withstand critical examination; such policies are unjust, and they are having and can be expected to continue to have very bad consequences (supported class-based AA; mentions outcomes as reason against AA).

Simon, Robert L., 1974, “Preferential Hiring: A Reply to Judith Jarvis Thomson,”     Philosophy & Public Affairs, 3 (Spring): 312–320. (rights-based arguments)

Simon, Robert L, 1979, “Individual Rights and ‘Benign’ Discrimination,” Ethics, 90 (October): 88–97. (uses rights-based argument)

Goldman, Alan, 1976, “Affirmative Action,” Philosophy & Public Affairs, 5 (Winter): 178–195. (uses rights-based argument; competence-based)

Newton, Lisa, 1973, “Reverse Discrimination as Unjustified,”     Ethics, 83 (July): 308–312.

Black, Virginia, 1974, “The Erosion of Legal Principles in the Creation of Legal Policies,”     Ethics, 84 (January): 93–115.

[Pojman: The case against affirmative action - Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?cluster=16723212326905877416&hl=en&as_sdt=5,48&sciodt=0,48)

--- Notes ----

### Subjugation

Why are these properties important? Why are arbitrariness and balancing versus exclusion relevant considerations that determine whether discrimination is bad? Well, we have to discuss why discrimination is ever bad. We cannot just assume that discrimination is bad sometimes without understanding *why*? In order for anything to be bad, it has to be considerably bad for someone somewhere. Now, note that there's nothing inherent to discrimination that implies that it is considerably bad for someone somewhere, i.e. their life would have to be relevantly damanged (I don't consider upset feelings as relevantly bad, because if that were the case then all discrimination would be bad). So what is it about discrimination that sometimes makes it significantly bad in the relevant manner? The answer has to be that discrimination has historically been used as a tool for racial oppression and subjugation, something that destroyed the lives of many minorities. Thus, we implicitly associate discrimination (which isn't inherently bad) with oppression/subjugation (which is inherently bad, as people's lives are destroyed). That is what makes arbitrariness and balancing versus exclusion relevant factors: in order for discrimination to actually ruin a group's lives, it must be arbitrary and it must be exclusionary. Otherwise, there's no way that it can be harmful. 

Now, racial discrimination would definitely be deemed immoral by most people. But I contend that the intuitions of most people are wrong here. Such a school would *not* be immoral. The intuition that it is immoral can be explained by the deep connection we have between racial *discrimination* and racial *oppression*. We have an immediate disapproving reaction to racial discrimination in schools because this was used as a tool for racial oppression in the past. If we could magically disassociate racial discrimination from racial oppression, then I think our intuitions regarding race-based discrimination would be more in line with our intuitions regarding socially accepted forms of discrimination (e.g. sex-based discrimination at all-male/all-female schools, sexual/racial discrimination by casting directors, sexual balancing at night clubs).

I think the laws enacted during the civil rights era chased morality in the sense that they corrected for the wrongs and damages resulting from governmental systematic racial oppression and they gave racial minorities a fair chance at integrating into society. Therefore, civil rights laws had a deeply moral motivation. However, it doesn't follow from this that all policies prohibited by these laws were themselves immoral. The reason it doesn't follow is that prohibiting some otherwise moral activities might be necessary to accomplish some broader moral goal. For example, I don't think hard drug usage or prostitution is inherently immoral, but outlawing them might be necessary to accomplish a broader moral goal - i.e. to prevent violence and harms that would inevitably occur when these acts are legal. Likewise, I would say racial discrimination by private companies is not inherently immoral, but outlawing them might have been necessary to accomplish a broader moral goal - i.e. to correct for systematic racial injustice and integrate racial minorities into society. 

### Public Universities

TBD

## Consequences

The problem *with certain implementations of affirmative action* (this qualifier is important) is that it leads to *under*qualified students. This is a problem because admitting underqualified applicants actually hurts the students that it tries to help. Admitting students who don't have the qualifications to succeed is setting them up for failure, and we should not be setting students up for failure. For example, [here's an interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VVvnTByzTmA) where economist Thomas Sowell shares that the black students at MIT were in the top 10% of the country in terms of mathematics, but they were in the bottom 10% at MIT. The result was that many were on academic probation and one-fourth never graduated. That's absurd. Students who would have otherwise excelled in their environment were struggling just to pass. This is not helping anyone.

For a somewhat more modern example, look at [Harvard University](http://www.foxnews.com/us/2014/11/18/rejected-asian-students-sue-harvard-over-admissions-that-favor-other-minorities.html). The 2009 study cited notes that "the average Asian American applicant needed a much higher 1460 SAT score to be admitted, a white student with similar GPA and other qualifications only needed a score of 1320, while blacks needed 1010 and Hispanics 1190." Combining that with [these percentile charts](http://www.collegeboard.com/prod_downloads/about/news_info/cbsenior/yr2005/02_v&m_composite_percentile_ranks_0506.pdf), Asians were in the 98th percentile, Whites were in the 92nd percentile, Hispanics were in the 77th percentile, and Blacks were in the 48th percentile. These are huge differences and it would be naive to assume that this was the best environment for the underrepresented students to thrive academically. 

If a kid from a disadvantaged background is in the 80th percentile of students, then the most *effective* way for this kid to succeed is to attend an institution that teaches to kids roughly in the 80th percentile. Sending him to an institution that teaches to, say, the 99th percentile will increase the probability that he will switch to a "soft" major and/or drop out. That puts the kid in an even *more* disadvantaged position, all in the ironic pursuit of equality. You might think that academics are not the only valuable attribute of college applicants, and you might be right. But it must be granted that there is a *base threshold* of college readiness that all students should have to meet before being accepted (you seem to grant this in your first paragraph). No doubt this threshold varies from college to college depending on the abilities of each school's student body. Accepting students who do not meet this threshold hurts them more than it helps them. My central claim is that affirmative action is wrong at least insofar as it allows for the acceptance of students that do not meet this threshold of college readiness.

It is not sufficient that the *intentions* of affirmative action are morally justifiable (that's a different concern that I bypass here). It is also necessary to consider the practical *consequences* of affirmative action. Often, discussions of affirmative action focus entirely on the former and none at all on the latter, but both concerns are necessary for good policy. We can't evaluate policy purely from a philosophical normative position. Normative evaluation is only valuable insofar as it guides what our *goal* should be. Once we agree on our *goal*, we have to empirically investigate the consequences of various policies to determine effective methods of achieving that goal. I would like to believe that most agree that our *goal* is to help underrepresented minorities thrive. However, affirmative action (of the kind mentioned here) is not the proper *policy* to accomplish that goal precisely because the consequences are ineffective. College readiness *matters*, and this fact cannot be ignored just because our intentions are good, because the consequences will come to hurt the students in the end.

You might say that certain groups tend to experience pre-university disadvantages that unfairly reduce their performance on traditional measurements of scholarly assessment (e.g. grades, test scores, writing ability, etc.). Okay, I can grant all of that. However, insofar as these disadvantages exist, the fact is that these disadvantages also (albeit unfairly) reduce their college *readiness*. The fact is, accepting unprepared students is not going to erase the lifetime of disadvantages that they have already endured. I grant the disadvantages, but the solution cannot be to add *more* disadvantages by mismatching students to institutions that don't cater to their abilities. The solution must be to remove disadvantages for the next generation and to help disadvantaged students by sending them to institutions that cater to their abilities (whether that be less prestigious universities, community colleges, trade schools, etc.).
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTIxNTA3MjU5NSwtMTIzNDI5MjM3MSw3Nz
E1MDQ3MjIsMzgwNzkyMzkxLC05MDkyMTQ4MCwtODY0NTkyOTU5
LC0zNDgxMDIzNTQsNzQ1NzgwMjkxLC04MDY2NjM1NDUsLTg5Mj
Q4OTI0OSwtNTMxMTM1NjYxLC0xNjUxMDA2Mzk5LDEwMjM0Mzcy
MCwtMzc2MjQzMTksMjAxMjA0NDk0OCwtNzcwNjU1NDkzLDk1MT
cyNjE0MSwtNzI4MjIxMzY4LC01NjA1NTgyODQsLTU4MzIxNjMz
MV19
-->