Some requirements for descriptivism:

1. Must explain how the normative supervenes on the non-normative.
2. Must explain how a mind-to-world-fit state of mind can produce a mind-to-world fit sate of mind.
3. If there are normative facts, then either the normative facts need to somehow explain our normative judgments or else normative facts must consist in our (hypothetical or idealized) normative judgments. Otherwise, there would be no causal connection bewteen our normative judgments, on the one hand, and the normative facts, on the other. That would mean we could have no justification for any of our normative judgments, because in order to have justified belief in p, it must be the case that one's belief in p is reliably explained by the fact that p (e.g. the perception that the Earth is not moving is not evidence that the Earth is not moving, because that perception is not better explained by the fact that the Earth is not moving).
4. Attitude-independent theories of normative facts would have to posit that the normative facts are ontologically prior to our normative judgments, but nevertheless explain our normative judgments. This seems impossible under non-naturalism. Under naturalism, it gets more complicated.
5. Attitude-dependent theories of normative facts must not reduce normative facts to our actual attitudes, as this would prevent disconnections between our actual attitudes and our normative judgments, and it would also preclude coherent questioning of one's actual attitudes. Cannot be the basis of moral judgments because that would prevent coherent moral disagreement assuming all partiies were fully rational.

General Problems:

1. Must explain how a mind-to-world-fit state of mind can produce a mind-to-world fit sate of mind.
2. Unnecessary: all of our normative discourse can be explained without appeal to the existence of normative entities, or judgments about such properties. 
3. Flexibility of language: A ought to X, A needs to X, A must X, X is crappy, X is disgusting, etc. can all mean the same thing. Best explained as prescriptions and/or expressions, rather than reports/descriptions.
4. Normative education/expressions: we teach children to form certain moral judgments by molding their non-cognitive attitudes; and this is done by rewarding/punishing behavior with various non-cognitive attitudes, and by showing examples of appropriate attitudes in certain circumstances.
5. Take a descriptivist theory of normative judgment which says that ascriptions of goodness to x express belief p to x. Take a non-cognitivist theory of normative judgment which says that such ascriptions express non-cognitivist attitude q to x. Imagine an agent held q with regard to x but they did not hold p with regard to x. It seems safe to say that they judge x to be good. Now imagine that they held p with regard to x but they did not hold q with regard to x. It seems safe to say that they don't judge to be good.