# Non-naturalism

This concerns *metaphysical* non-naturalism - the view that normative concepts and entities lack spatio-temporal properties and have no casual influence.

## Causal Inertness

The lack of influence that normative properties place on the world pose the following three problems:

1. **Concept**: _There is no evolutionary benefit to developing a capacity to track these properties_. In order for there to be a benefit in developing a perceptual faculty, that faculty must be useful at increasing an organism's biological fitness. The only perceptual faculties useful in increasing an organism's biological fitness are faculties that track relevant natural facts, as natural facts are the only facts that influence an organism's chance at reproducing. 
2. **Epistemology**: _We have no epistemic access to non-natural facts_. It is a necessary condition on justified belief that one's belief be explained by the facts in question. Perceptions of natural facts are good evidence for natural properties not because of an intrinsic connection between *perceiving* p and p being true. Rather, *perceiving* p is good evidence for p only if p *being true* causally exlpains why one perceives p. The reliable causal connection between *p being true* and *perceiving p* is required to treat *perceiving p* as a relibable detection of p. There is no way that a non-natural fact p could ever causally explain how we perceive or judge p to be true. Thus, we cannot treat our judging that non-natural fact p as evidence that p is true. This means none of our normative beliefs are ever justified.
3. **Ontology**: _Parsimony is preferrable to complexity with regard to ontology_. When determining which entities exist in the world, we should use inference to the best explanation. Theories with fewer assumptions and better explanatory power are superior. Imagine a world without any non-natural properties but with all the same natural properties. These two worlds would have equal explanatory power, but the world without unneeded properties would have less assumptions and would therefore be superior. The reason is because non-natural properties must be causally inert. The existing of non-natural properties is not necessary to explain reality as we see it.

## Moral Supervenience

It seems to be an a priori conceptual truth that moral properties supervene on the non-moral properties, i.e. two circumstances which have identical non-moral properties must also have identical moral properties. This can be easily explained by naturalism, but it is difficult to see how this is explained by non-naturalism. There are two issues here, one epistemological and one ontological.

1. **Epistemology**: When we see an action that we judge to be wrong, we don't just judge it to be wrong in that particular circumstance. We judge that a particular action with certain natural properties always coinstantiates normative properties. Non-naturalism purports that we perceive the non-natural moral facts as we perceive certain natural facts. But there is nothing about this perceptual model that *necessarily guarantees* that we will perceive the same moral facts in circumstances where we perceive the same natural facts. Any perceived supervenience would be, at best, a posteriori; the supervenience relation couldn't be perceived, for have only perceived the one circumstance Thus, the perceptual model of non-naturalism cannot explain the supervenience of the moral on the non-moral.
2. **Ontology**: It is a *conceptual* truth that the normative supervenes on the non-normative. No two worlds can have the same non-normative properties yet have different normative properties. Thus, normative properties and non-normative properties are not just coextensive, they are *necessarily* coexstensive; they are coexstensive in all possible worlds. However, there are no distinct properties that are coextensive in all possible worlds. If two properties are distinct, then there must be *some* possible worlds where only one of the properties obtain. Thus, normative properties, *if they are properties*, must be natural.

## Motivation

Non-naturalism fails to account for the motivational feature of normative judgments for the very same reasons that mind-independent naturalism fails. The fact that moral properties move from the natural realm to the non-natural realm does not increase the motivational weight. Attributions of goodness to P appear to have a conceptual link with the guidance of action towards promoting P (judgment internalism). For any non-naturalistic property R, we can imagine clear-headed beings who would fail to find appropriate reason or motive to action in the mere fact that R obtains regarding P. The fact that attributions of goodness are necessarily action-guiding whereas attributions of R are only contingently action-guiding suggests that goodness and R are not analytically equivalent. 