# Standards of Correctness

## General Arguments

*Source: /Original/Metaethics/Normative Truth/General Arguments.md*

### Metaphysical Non-naturalism

*Metaphysical non-naturalism* is the view that normative concepts and entities lack spatio-temporal properties and have no casual influence.

#### Causal Inertness

The lack of influence that normative properties place on the world pose the following three problems:

1. **Concept**: _There is no evolutionary benefit to developing a capacity to track these properties_. In order for there to be a benefit in developing a perceptual faculty, that faculty must be useful at increasing an organism's biological fitness. The only perceptual faculties useful in increasing an organism's biological fitness are faculties that track relevant natural facts, as natural facts are the only facts that influence an organism's chance at reproducing. 
2. **Epistemology**: _We have no epistemic access to non-natural facts_. It is a necessary condition on justified belief that one's belief be explained by the facts in question. Perceptions of natural facts are good evidence for natural properties not because of an intrinsic connection between *perceiving* p and p being true. Rather, *perceiving* p is good evidence for p only if p *being true* causally exlpains why one perceives p. The reliable causal connection between *p being true* and *perceiving p* is required to treat *perceiving p* as a relibable detection of p. There is no way that a non-natural fact p could ever causally explain how we perceive or judge p to be true. Thus, we cannot treat our judging that non-natural fact p as evidence that p is true. This means none of our normative beliefs are ever justified.
3. **Ontology**: _Parsimony is preferrable to complexity with regard to ontology_. When determining which entities exist in the world, we should use inference to the best explanation. Theories with fewer assumptions and better explanatory power are superior. Imagine a world without any non-natural properties but with all the same natural properties. These two worlds would have equal explanatory power, but the world without unneeded properties would have less assumptions and would therefore be superior. The reason is because non-natural properties must be causally inert. The existing of non-natural properties is not necessary to explain reality as we see it.

#### Moral Supervenience

It seems to be an a priori conceptual truth that moral properties supervene on the non-moral properties, i.e. two circumstances which have identical non-moral properties must also have identical moral properties. This can be easily explained by naturalism, but it is difficult to see how this is explained by non-naturalism. There are two issues here, one epistemological and one ontological.

1. **Epistemology**: When we see an action that we judge to be wrong, we don't just judge it to be wrong in that particular circumstance. We judge that a particular action with certain natural properties always coinstantiates normative properties. Non-naturalism purports that we perceive the non-natural moral facts as we perceive certain natural facts. But there is nothing about this perceptual model that *necessarily guarantees* that we will perceive the same moral facts in circumstances where we perceive the same natural facts. Any perceived supervenience would be, at best, a posteriori; the supervenience relation couldn't be perceived, for have only perceived the one circumstance Thus, the perceptual model of non-naturalism cannot explain the supervenience of the moral on the non-moral.
2. **Ontology**: It is a *conceptual* truth that the normative supervenes on the non-normative. No two worlds can have the same non-normative properties yet have different normative properties. Thus, normative properties and non-normative properties are not just coextensive, they are *necessarily* coexstensive; they are coexstensive in all possible worlds. However, there are no distinct properties that are coextensive in all possible worlds. If two properties are distinct, then there must be *some* possible worlds where only one of the properties obtain. Thus, normative properties, *if they are properties*, must be natural.

#### Motivation

Non-naturalism fails to account for the motivational feature of normative judgments for the very same reasons that mind-independent naturalism fails. The fact that moral properties move from the natural realm to the non-natural realm does not increase the motivational weight. Attributions of goodness to P appear to have a conceptual link with the guidance of action towards promoting P (judgment internalism). For any non-naturalistic property R, we can imagine clear-headed beings who would fail to find appropriate reason or motive to action in the mere fact that R obtains regarding P. The fact that attributions of goodness are necessarily action-guiding whereas attributions of R are only contingently action-guiding suggests that goodness and R are not analytically equivalent. 

### Analytic Reductive Naturalism

*Open Question Argument*. (1) Any proposed analytic reduction of a term must be uninformative and obvious. (2) Any analytic reduction of goodness would be informative and nonobvious. (3) Therefore, there can be no analytic reduction of moral terms. Consider the question "Is X good". Now, imagine that a proposed complex analysis of goodness states that all questions of the form 'Is X good' are questions of the form 'Does X have naturalistic property Y' (e.g. is X desired, is X pleasurable, etc.). The problem with this is that, we can always further ask "Is it good that X has property Y" (e.g. "Is it good to desire X", "Is it good that X is pleasurable", etc.). This further question is clearly intelligible and coherent. But, if goodness that could be analyzed in terms of Y, then such a question would not be intelligible. For example, because triangle just means "three sided polygon", the question "do triangles have three sides?" would not be coherent and would reveal a conceptual confusion. Someone who asked that question would not be a competent user of the concepts involved. On the other hand, the question "is it good that X has naturalistic property Y" could be asked by a competent user of the concepts involved, without revealing any conceptual confusion. 

*Insistence on normative language*. If normative term N really meant natural term M, then why not carry on making claims about M? If the thesis were true, this would be equivalent to making claims about N, so there should be no difference. The fact that one chooses not to do so implies either (1) he believes that there really is something about N not captured in M, or (2) he believes that society believes that there is something about N not captured in M. Either way, either he or society believes that N and M are not analytically equivalent.

Response: deny that all analytic reductions must be trivial and uninformative.

*Tautology Argument*. While it may be appropriate for an analytic reduction to be nontrivial, it is not appropriate that an analytic reduction could ever provide one with a *reason* for action. If normative property M can be analytically reduced to natural property N, then saying "N is M" would be a tautology, and thus could provide no reason for action. For example, if goodness could be analytically reduced to pleasure, then if someone said "pleasure is good", then this would be equivalent to saying "pleasure is pleasure" or "goodness is goodness". But presumably the claim "pleasure is good" is supposed to provide someone with reason for action. But no tautology such as "pleasure is pleasure" or "goodness is goodness" could ever provide a reason or motive for someone to promote pleasure.

#### Agent Attitude Independent

These arguments attack theories of the following form: A judges that he has normative reason to do X iff descriptive relation R holds involving A and X whereby this makes no referent to any actual or hypothetical attitude of A.

*Lack of Normativity/Motivation*. Attributions of goodness to P appear to have a conceptual link with the guidance of action towards promoting P (judgment internalism). For any naturalistic property R, we can imagine clear-headed beings who would fail to find appropriate reason or motive to action in the mere fact that R obtains regarding P. The fact that attributions of goodness are *necessarily* action-guiding whereas attributions of R are only *contingently* action-guiding suggests that goodness and R are not analytically equivalent. The naturalist can respond by rejecting judgment internalism or rejecting analytic naturalism in favor of synthetic naturalism (or maintaining that some naturalistic properites *are* intrinsically motivating, which seems strange). This argument should also be used against analytic non-natural reductionism and perhaps even some forms of synthetic naturalism.

#### Agent Attitude Dependent

##### Actual Attitudes

This concerns theories that analyze normative judgments in terms of an agent's actual desires, preferences, attitudes etc. as opposed to their idealized or hypothetical attitutdes.

*Lack of normative motivational failures*. There must also be some slack between desires and values. An agent may desire to X without valuing to X (e.g. kleptomaniac, addicts, etc.). Likewise, an agent may value X without desiring to X (e.g. the depressed, weakness of will). In general, due to psychological compulsions, physical addictions, emotional disturbances, etc. there is an imperfect connection between what an agent judges to be a normative reasons for action (i.e. what they value) and the agent's motivating reasons for action (i.e. what they desire). A theory that merely reduces normative judgments to mere desires cannot account for this.

##### Moral Analysis

This concerns theories that analyze "X is morally good" in the form of one's (idealized, hypothetical, or actual) personal desires, preferences, sentiments, etc.

*Lack of Disagreement Argument*. Assume two people do agree that the meaning of moral terms reduces to some subjective account, e.g. "X is morally right" means "I approve of X" or "I desire X" or even "I would approve of X were I fully rational" (Where X is a determinate action). When these two people disagree about whether X is to be done, they aren't even disagreeing. One is saying "I desire doing X" and the other is saying "I do not desire doing X". But these are not incompatible claims. Even assuming they're making claims about their fully rational desires, and even assuming fully rational agents always formed the same desires in the same circumstances, these two claims would not necessarily be in conflict, since the differing *circumstances* of the two agents could justify having different desires. In general, a judgment that A do X, where predicating X is understood as a subjective belief, tends to vanish as one learns that A's reluctance to X is not caused by any sources of irrationally, i.e. free of psychological compulsions, emotional disturbances, physical addictions (think art, humor, taste, etc.). However, a judgment that A morally ought to X tends to persist despite learning that A's reluctance to X is not caused by irrationality.

##### Idealized or Hypothetical Attitudes

This may be satisfactory as a theory of the truth conditions of normative judgments. Its not clear if it meets the conceptual requirements. Note that this would have to be limited to judgments of rationality generally, not to moral discussions.

##### Moral Functionalism



### Synthetic Reductive Naturalism

*A Priori Argument*. It seems we can come to learn about normative truths a priori. This is inexplicable if there is an a posteriori synthetic relationship between normative facts and non-normative facts. I.e. we cannot learn a priori that yellow is such and such wavelength, or that water is H2O. Yet how can it be the case that we can learn a priori that, e.g. some natural property *necessarily* co-instantiates a normative property? 

*Lack of Disagreement*. Synthetic identities can be found in other domains because we can easily fix the referrents of terms like "water" or "yellow", and then we can find that property that is always instantiated with that referrent. One strategy for doing this is to present a dispositional analysis: an entity is "yellow" just in case it causes sensation that we normally perceive as "yellow". Such a dispositional analysis is not promising for moral terms. Imagine that two societies are lingustically identical except when one society used the word "good" they referred to pleasure and the other society referred to God's will. On this reading, the two cultures wouldn't even disagree with each other, since the content of "good" in these two societies are different - they are using the same word to track different phenomenon. But it seems that these cultures can coherently disagree with each other, especailly if they each act in accordance with what is good.

#### Cornell Realism

These take a *causal reference theory* for moral terms, because a causal reference theory is the standard theory of reference for natural kind terms. This rejects the *description theory of reference*. What determines whether a natural property is good is not whether it has the attributes ascribed to it by the term "good", but whether it causally regulates our use of the word "good". We are looking not at the semantic attribution behind the term, but rather at the properties causally responsible for that word. This is similar to how we use the word "health". When we say that someone is "healthy", it's unclear what the *meaning* of that might be. However, we can determine what property "healthy" *refers to* by finding what causally regulates our use of the term "health".

These arguments attack theories of the following form: A judges that he has normative reason to do X iff descriptive relation R holds involving A and X *because* of some contingent linguistic practice of his culture of his own personal definition, i.e. A judges that he has normative reason to do X iff he judges that X has the properties which causally explain our use of a "normative reason". Contrast this with analytic naturalistic theories that are not based on contingent linguistic conventions: e.g. A judges that he has normative reason to do X iff A believes that he would desire to do X if he were fully informed, consistent, etc. *because* this is constituitive of rational agency (regardless of any linguistic conventions).

*Lack of disagreement*: (1) The meaning of our normative terms are determined by our contingent societal/personal circumstances. (2) Societies/persons can have moral disagreements that are not purely semantic. (3) Therefore, normative terms cannot be analytically reduced to non-moral terms based on societal/personal definitions. Definitions are social constructions. They are ascriptions of arbitrary utterances and symbols to particular concepts or objects in the world. They are appropriate only to the extent that they are supported by a particular linguistic community. Two groups can form separate linguistic communities with different definitions of moral terms, and we wouldn't say that one of the communities were *linguistically* incorrect or mistaken. For example, imagine another linguistic community that was linguistically identical to our own except that their moral terms were switched, i.e. 'good' in their society referred to what we refer to as 'bad' in our society, and so forth. Let's also say that they acted in ways that promoted what they considered to be 'good'. It seems like it is *intelligible* for us to say that they are mistaken in their behavior. But in this case, their mistake cannot be attributed to a linguistic mistake, e.g. we don't think the French are mistaken just because they use the term 'grape' to refer to what we mean by 'raisin' and use 'raisin' to refer to what we mean by 'grape'. The reason we can still disagree is not because of a semantic dispute, but because of a normative or motivational dispute (see below), which is excluded from this analysis. 

*Translation Argument*. Imagine we wanted to translate another culture's language to our own. When translating our normative terms, we would be skeptical to attribute to them any normative terms if those terms did not usually accompany the corresponding motivation.