# The Externalist Challenge

Consider two forms of internalism:

1. Practicality of moral judgment: if A judges that it is right to do X, then either A has some motivation to do X, or A is practically irrational (e.g. absent weakness of will, depression, etc.).
2. Rationalism: it is right for A to do X only if there is a reason for A to do X.

*Rationalism is a stronger thesis than the practicality requirement*, for anyone who accepts rationalism must also accept the practicality of moral judgment, but the reverse need not hold. Rationalism entails practicality because of the following plattitudes about the nature of reasons: an agent has reason to X only if that agent would be motivated to do X insofar as he is rational; as a consequence, an agent who judges themself to have reason to do X would be motivated to do X insofar as he is rational. Similarly, as a consequence of rationalism, judging that an action is right entails a judgment that one has reason to perform the action. Therefore, if rationalism is true, then to judge that an action is right entails judging that one has reason to perform the action, which entails that one would be motivated to perform the action insofar as one is rational.

On the other hand, one can accept the practicality of moral judgment while denying rationalism. For example, if moral judgments are just expressions of preference or desire, then they would be motivating to the extent that preferences and desires are. But these preferences or desires need not be requirements of reason, so rationalism doesn't follow.

Opponents to the practicality of morality (from Brink) and rationalism (from Foot) shall be considered in turn.

## Practicality Requirement

*The Amoralist: conceptual mastery requires appropriate extensionality and cause of term-usage*. David Brink argues that we can conceive of an Amoralist, someone who recognizes the existence of moral considerations and remoains unmoved to follow the duties prescribed. The defender of the practicality of rationality must deny that such a person is conceivable, that such an idea is incoherent. However, it certainly seems conceivable, according to Brink, because such an amoralist can use moral terms to pick out the exact same properties that we do, and their usage would be guided by the same entities that guide our usage. Interanalists accept that one can reliably apply moral terms, but they affirm that the amoralist doesn't actually regard a duty as a moral demand; rather the duties are regarded as the demands of conventional morality, i.e. they use moral terms using "Inverted" Commas" around the terms. According to David Brink, this is a poor response: we *can* imagine that someone genuinely accepts a duty as being moral without being moved.

*Analogy with the color-blind: conceptual mastery can require physiological counterpart*. The "Inverted Commas" reply is on the right track but mistaken: it is not that amoralists are making a kind of judgment different than that of moral judgments (i.e. judgments about societal uses of moral terms); rather, they are sincerely trying to make a moral judgment, but they *fail*. Consider an analogy with someone who is (color-)blind from birth, but who has a reliable method of using color terms. We can imagine that she has technological assistance to determine the surface reflectance properties of any object with ease. Such a person could use colors with the same extension as everyone else, and her uses could be determined by the same entities that determine our uses, and her judgments needn't be equivalent to expressing the color judgments of other people. However, some argue that such a person wouldn't really have master of color terms; for it is constitutive of possessing color concepts and mastering color concepts that one have the appropriate visual experiences under suitable conditions, which means they would be failing to make color judgments. A similar argument can be made for the use of moral terms by alleged amoralists. The question, then, is whether the appropriate extension and causal explanation of one's use of a term implies that they possess mastery the concepts in question, or whether a further physiological phenomenon may be necessary (e.g. visual experiences, motivation, etc.).

*Explain the reliable connection with motivation without moral fetishism*. The account of mastery that requires the further physiological phenomenon should be preferred because it alone can provide an explanation of the reliable connection between moral judgment and motivation in the good and strong-willed person. To illustrate this connection, imagine someone who enters a debate about which political party to support states that they ought to vote for party X beacuse it promotes values ABC and for that reason they will vote for X. But then they are convinced that party Y actually promotes values ABC far better. We can reliably expect that this person (in normal circumstances) will have a newfound motivation to vote for party Y assuming they are sincerely convinced. It seems that this reliable connection cannot be explained by the externalist. The externalist will have to explain the connection because the agent is contingently a good and strong-willed person. It is one's contingent motivation to do that which is right combined with the belief that X is right which explains why one is motivated to do X, not the *mere* belief that X is right. The problem with this is that it characterizes a good person as not one who has non-derivative motivation to promote justice, equality, well-being, etc. but rather as someone who has non-derivative motivation to do what is right and (because of a belief that justice, equality, well-being, etc. are right) a derived motivation to do those things. This doesn't seem to capture the motivations of common people or who we would consider good people; it treats moral virtue as a kind of moral fetish.

## Rationality Requirement

*Morality as a system of Hypothetical Imperatives*. Philippa Foot rejects Kant's claim that moral facts are facts about reasons for action and instead argues for an anti-rational institutional account of moral facts. Foot concedes that moral requirements purport to be categorical imperatives rather than hypothetical imperatives, i.e. the considerations that determine whether an agent has a moral duty depends soley on the agent's *circustances* rather than his *desires* or *interests*. However, she notes that this is also the case with ettiquette, i.e. the rules of ettiquette that apply to a person depend only on that person's *circumstances* not their desires or interests. For example, if someone says that their desires would be satisfied by replying to a letter in the first person that was written in the third, it doesn't follow that they did not violate a norm of ettiquette, or that they "shouldn't" (from the perspective of ettiquette) have acted as they did. So both ettiquette and morality issue categorical imperatives as opposed to the hypothetical imperatives issued by prudential rationality. However, this is not enough to suggest that the "shoulds" from ettiquette are requirements of reasons, so it also cannot be enough to suggest that the "shoulds" from morality are requirements of reason. Therefore, there needs to be a different argument to show that morality provides requirements of rationality. But this seems implausible because the traditional view of practical rationality links reasons for action with an agent's ends or goals, making practical rationality a system of hypothetical imperatives. Thus, moral facts should be seen, as with ettiquette, as institutional facts.

*Cannot account for practicality*. One objection to an institutional account of moral facts is that it cannot account for the practicality of moral judgments, which was already shown to be true. An agent who recognizes the demands prescribed by a system of institutional duties need not necessarily have any corresponding motivation to act in accordance with those demands, without revealing any practical rationality. One's motivation for acting in accord with the demands of ettiquette or the law is purely contingent; to the extent that such a motivation exists, it is a derivative motivation that is based on either a non-derivative motivation to obey the law or ettiquette or some other non-derivative motivation that would be promoted by following the law/ettiquette. Such an institutional analysis may be able to account for law or ettiquette, but it cannot appropriately capture the practicality of morality (see above).

*Morality connected to Rationality*. Another objection to Foot's conception of moral facts as institutional facts is an argument against her assumption that practical rationality is a system of hypothetical imperatives, i.e. that one has a reason for action insofar as it promotes some end that he presently holds. This argument will be given later. Assuming that this argument succeeds and that requirements of practical rationality are *categorical* rather than hypothetical, then an argument to explain why the categorical requirements of morality connect to the categorical requirements of rationality. The argument can be given as follows: (1) moral requirements apply to rational agents as such; (2) we expect (in the sense of predict) rational agents to act as they are morally required; therefore (3) being rational, as such, must suffice to ground our expectation (prediction) that rational agents behave morally; (4) the only thing that we can expect (predict) rational agents as such to do is that they behave as they are rationally required; therefore, (5) we must think of moral requirements as categorical requirements of reason or rationality.

*Objectivity + Practicality => we expect moral behavior* The controversial premise is premise (2) that we expect rational agents to do what they are morally required to do. It is already shown that agents will be motivated to do what they judge to be moral, so it can follow that that we expect rational agents to do what they judge themselves morally required to do. This is not suffice to show that we expect rational agents to do what they are morally required to do, for different rational agents might form different judgments about their moral requirements without being irrational. But this is not possible given the plattitude of objectivity (i.e. that all rational agents will converge to the same moral judgments insofar as they are rational). Thus, the practicality of moral judgments combined with the objectivity of moral judgments justifies premise (2) that we expect rational agents to do what they are morally required to do.

*Approval/dissaproval requires expectations from the subject*. Another argument can be given for premise (2). The appropriateness of a range of moral attitudes requires premise (2) to be true and, therefore, also the the rationalist conceptual claim. We approve and disapprove of what people do when moral matters are at stake. But such attitudes presuppose an expectation that rational agents act rightly. Note that approval and disapproval differ remarkedly from liking and disliking something. There are no restrictions on liking or disliking something, but it seems that approval or disapproval require that the object of the (dis)approval take into account the attitude of the (dis)approver in forming their decisions, e.g. it makes sense for me to (dis)like your consumption of strawberry ice-cream with no restriction, but it only makes sense for me to (dis)approve of your consumption only if I'm evaluating your behavior against a standard which there is a legitimate expectation that you will consider. Therefore, approval and disapproval only exist when there are grounds for legitimate expectations for someone else's behavior. Because we (dis)approve of rational agents insofar as they behave (im)morally, we have legitimate expectations that rational agents behave morally. What grounds these legitimate expectations must be that we conceive of moral requirements as requirements of rationality.