# Allan Gibbard, Wise Choices Apt Feelings

## Morality and Rationality

To call something rational is to endorse it in some way. A wide variety of human attributes can be judged rational or irrational - a person can *act* (ir)rationally, *believe* (ir)rationally or even *feel* (ir)rationally in certain circumstances. What it is rational to do need not perfectly match what it is moral to do. Moral judgments are to be understood in terms of judgments of *moral wrongness*, and judgments of moral wrongness are to be undertood in terms of *blameworthiness*. To say that an action is *blameworthy* is to say that an agent would be to blame for performing that action; to say that someone is to blame for performing an action is to say that it would be rational for (1) that person to *feel guilty* for performing the action and (2) others to *resent him* for performing the action. 

To say that an action is morally wrong is to say that it violates standards that we demand other agents use to rule out certain actions. These standards are such that an agent who violates those standards would be to blame if (1) the agent must have performed the action because he wasn't *motivated* to rule out the action (i.e. it wasn't an accident), and (2) there are no extenuating circumstances that render the agent not fully *responsible* (i.e. the agent isn't mentally deficient, the agent had other alternative possibilities that did not cause extreme misery).

## Norm-Expressivistic Analysis of Rationality

To *say* that something is rational is to *express* acceptance of a system of norms that, on balance, permit it. To *judge* that something is rational is to actually *accept* such a system of norms. A norm here is a possible rule or prescription expressible in the form of an imperative. To decide what is really rational is to decide what norms to accept ourselves. Going back to moral analysis, it follows that to say that someone is blameworthy is to accept a system of norms that prescribe guilt from the agent and resent from others.

Accepting a norm is a kind of psychological state that we are far from understanding. Acceptance of a norm is motivating at least to a degree. However, this is not the only kind of motivation. The motivation involved accepting a norm, *normative motivation*, can often conflict with, and be overpowered by, motivations that do not involve accepting a norm (e.g. weakness of will). This suggests that there are two competing psychological faculties. The psychological faculty involved in normative motivation is the *normative control system*, found only in relatively intelligent and sentient creatures. The psychological faculty involved in the motivational system shared with beasts is the *animal control system*.

The evolutionary advantage of a normative control system can be illustrated by considering the evolutionary advantage of language. Language evolved to facilitate both complex coordination among individuals and complex individual plans. In order for this to have been possible, words must be motivating. Norms can be conceived of as linguistically encoded precepts. The normative motivational system is a linguistically infused kind of motivation that evolved because of the advantages of coordination and planning through language. The normative control system evolved as part of the evolution of human linguistic abilities, which came sometime after the animal control system.

## The biology of coordination

The normative control system, including both norm-acceptance and norm-internalization, is understood as a natural, biological phenomenon. The phenomena is explained by drawing on biological theory. The functional role of norm-acceptance is their capacity to *coordinate*. Systems of normative control in human beings adapted to achieve interpersonal coordination in a wide variety of possible different environments and cultures.

Human beings likely evolved to face an abundance of situations that involved *bargaining problems*. A *bargaining problem* consists of a set of alternative systems of cooperation or mutual restraint, each of which is mutually beneficial compared to no cooperation or restraint, but some of which are better or worse for particular parties. Benefits are typically measured in terms of preference statisfaction. In the case of human ancestors, the benefits were in terms of biological fitness or capacity to propogate genes (this is not to say that humans had the goal of biological fitness in mind during bargaining problems, but that more biologically fit goals were selected for). Early humans found themselves in an *evolutionary bargaining situation*, a recurrent interaction among organizations that exhibit bargaining problems. Evolutionary bargaining situations select for organisms to hold an *evolutionarily stable strategy*, a strategy whereby if all adopt it, then that strategy is as fitness enhacing as any other strategy easily accessible by mutation. One such strategy would be to be cooperative with others insofar as they are and become violent in retaliation when threatened.

Propensities well coordinated with the propensities of others would have been fitness-enhancing. Thus, many human propensities evolved as *coordination devices*. Our emotional propensities and normative capacities are largely the result of these selection pressures. For example, consider guilt and resentment. If one person resents an action of another and the other does not feel a corresponding guilt, one can expect trouble to occur. Guilt involves the acknowledgement of wrong, and makes possible reconciliation and an assurance that the disapproved action shall not occur again. The chances of trouble for all parties are reduced when one feels guilty when is demanded by the resentment of others. In general, it is evolutionarily advantageous for our emotional propensities to be coordinated in this manner. Given that human beings can be moved by words, language enabled the ability to coordinate infinitely complex plans for action, thought and emotion. The special role of the normative control system is located in this role of language to coordinate behavior and expectations.

## Internalizing and Accepting a Norm

Within the normative motivational system, we can distinguish between *internalizing* a norm and *accepting* a norm. To *internalize* a norm is to have a motivational tendency of a particular kind to act in the manner prescribed by the norm. The particular kind of motivational tendency is the component of our motivation involved in coordination. This ability is shared with other social animals. Internalizing a norm needn't involve explicit awareness of the norm or even an ability to formulate the norm when queried, but can nevertheless coordinate one's behavior and may be formulated by a sophisticated observer (think of unspoken cultural norms such as those concerning conversational distance). Internalizing norms constitute evolutionary adaptations that are the result of natural selection favoring certain patterns (e.g. norms). These selection pressures are largely a matter of coordinating the behavior of the animals. Whereas many animals are genetically predisposed to internalize certain norms (e.g. dogs that mark off certain territory), social animals can be raised to internalize a wider variety of norms. Humans in particular can use language to express, educate, and internalize any arbitrary norms.

*Accepting* a norm consists in a disposition to avow the norm in unconstrained normative discussion, as a result of demands for consistency in the positions one takes in *normative discussion*. Accepting a norm seems peculiarly human and seems to require language. *Normative discussion* consists in working out what we are to do or think or feel under real and hypothetical situations. In other words, normative discussion is the social coordinating procedure by which we determine which norms to accept. Normative discussion would be evolutarily advantageous only insofar as it tended to consensus in the norms we accept, because shared evaluation is central to human life as it serves biological functions of rehearsal and coordination. Thus, the tendency toward consensus is characteristic of normative discussion. The two mechanisms by which normative discusssion tends to consensus are mutual influence and a responsiveness to demands for consistency. Someone who refused the mutual demand for consistency would be a poor candidate for cooperation.

This allows for another kind of motivational conflict, this time a conflict with the normative control system. Oftentimes, we may *internalize* norm X at the expense of norm Y even though we *accept* that norm Y outweighs X in that situation, i.e. we judge it rational to follow norm Y but we are moved most by norm X (e.g. consider the Milgram's experiments). Judging something to be rational, then, need not involve being motivated most by that norm compared with other norms.

## Acceptance, Action and Persuasion

In order for the normative control system to be evoluationarily advantageous, there must be two criteria: (1) normative dicussion must tend towards consensus in norm-acceptance, and (2) norm-acceptance must tend towards guiding action, i.e. *accepting* a norm must tend towards *internalizing* the norm. Selection pressures would have favored these capacities only if they constituted an evolutarily stable strategy. 

The motivational character of norm-acceptance can be inferred because if norm-acceptance had no tie to behavior, it would not have been selected for. There are great gains to be had from coordinating one's actions and expectations with others, which explains why the norms accepted under normative discussion tend to be motivating. However, similar considerations can also explain why norm-acceptance is not necessarily overwhelmingly motivational. There can also be opposing gains to be had by accepting a norm (or purporting to accept a norm) and doing otherwise. This results in a selective pressure for a mitigated motivation attached to norm-acceptance.

The tendency towards consensus in normative discussion can also be inferred from evolutary considerations. Normative discussion can be beneficial only assuming a certain firmness and a certain persuadability. A person who is wholly unpersuadable would get few benefits, and would thus be a poor candidate for cooperative social life. Such a being would risk ostracism. However, a person who is a pushover would also suffer costs. Such a person would be open to manipulation with no concern for his ends, preferences or biological fitness. This results in a selective pressure for a *negotiative* feature of normative discussion; it is advantageous to have a mitgated respondence to the norms accepted by those in one's community. 

Avowal influences what the audience accepts and expects one to do. Thus, self-serving arguments will sometimes pay, at least insofar as they are persuasive. However, arguments that are too blatantly self-serving may discredit one as a partner in cooperative life. The propensities selected for, then, would be a tendency to profess norms that can attract others, while bending the norms a little in his favor. This is not to say that in normative discussion, humans are always necessarily calculating the risks and rewards of deception and integrity. Rather, this is to say that the *sources* that shaped human psychology, which can include dispositions to following/breaking a norm without these considerations ever explicitly entering one's consciousness.