# J.L. Mackie, From Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong

## Moral Skepticism

There are no objective values. Objective values are not part of the fabric of the world. This includes all moral values - goodness, rightness, duty - as well as nonmoral values such as aesthetic values. Note that this form of moral scepticism is distinct from any first order moral scepticism, such as a view that rejects the practice of expressing judgments, or that rejects conventional moral views of a particular society. This is rather a second order moral scepticism. This is scepticism about the status of moral values and the nature of moral values, and about how these values fit into the world. Further, this is not to say that the properties which are ascribed differential moral values are not distinct; but rather, that there is no objective difference of moral values within those properties.

This moral scepticism is also to be distinguished from moral subjectivist analysis of moral language (i.e. "X is right" means "I approve of X"). The core of this moral scepticism is an ontological thesis, not a linguistic or conceptual thesis. The core of the theory is not especially concerned with giving an analysis of moral language (though this is given as a development, but not a core feature, of the argument). While it may be true that a subjectivist analysis of moral language entails this sort of ontological scepticism, the converse does not hold: One can reject the existence of objective moral values (ontological thesis) while adopting a non-subjectivist analysis of moral language.

## The claim to objectivity

The main tradition of moral philosophy and much of ordinary thought is committed to the existence of objective moral values. Kant, the rationalist Samuel Clarke the sentimentalist Hutcheson, and Richard Price are given as examples of philosophers committed to objectivity in moral values. Furthermore, conceptual analysis reveals an evaluative, prescriptive, intrinsically action-guiding character to morality. The ordinary user of moral language means to describe certain actions as having a certain intrinsic character, and this is independent of anyone's attitude or relation to it. At the same time, though, this character is not purely descriptive and inert; it involves a call for action that is not contingent upon any desire or preference. Any analysis of moral terms which omits the claim to objective, intrinsic, prescriptivity is incomplete. However, we have no reason to believe that there exists any actions with such features, which is why an Error Theory about morality is appropriate. 

## Arguments against objectivity

### Relativity

There is well-known variation among moral codes between different societies and different points in time, as well as differences between groups and individuals within society. The mere occurrence of these disagreements doesn't disprove objectivity, as there is variation among scientific branches as well. But differences in science can be explained by different speculative inferences inadequate evidence, which does not seem indicative of morality. Differences in moral code seems based on people's adherence to different ways of life, as opposed to different percetpions of objective values. 

Some philophers rebut by postulating that implicit in every moral society are some very generic basic moral truths. These moral truths combine with notions of universalization can be used to rebut the argument for relativity. The relavity that we see can be the result of these very general moral truths combined with different empirical circumstances (or mistakes in rationality), as opposed to adherence to a specific way of life. Mackie's response that this is not representative of ordinary moral language. While professional philosophers might be concerned with systemetizing general moral principles, ordinary moral thought seems not concerned with cohering with a specific set of prciniples. Ordinary moral thought seems best explained by adhering to seemingly plausible intuitions based on what observations arouse certain sentiments.

### Epistemological Queerness

If there were objective values, we could only become aware of them by some special faculty of moral perception or intuition unlike our ordinary methods of gathering knowledge. In this sense, Intuitionism - one of many moral theories comitted to objectivity - explicitly states what all other objective theories implicitly necessitate. Epistemic access to objective moral facts requires a strange inuitive faculty that cannot be reduced to sensory perception, conceptual analysis, inference, logical construction, etc. A counter to this argument might be to state that many of other forms of knowledge also require a strange intuitive faculty - causation, time and space, necessity and possibility, etc. Mackie believes that a satisfactory explanation for objective knowledge in these areas can be given that cannot vindicate objective values.

### Metaphysical Queerness

If there were objective values, then that would be very strange entities unlike anything else in the universe. An objective good, according to Mackie, is best illustrated by Plato's Forms. Something being objectively good impleis that it would be sought by anyone acquainted with it, not because of any contingent fact of any particular person's desires or ends, but because it is intrinsically motivating. But such appears to be impossible. The only thing that can be intrinsically motivating is an agent's desires or contingent motivations. Anything outside of this motivating set cannot be motivating. The notion of an intrinsically, necessarily motivating feature is strange.

Another strangeness to objective moral values is the alleged supervenience of the moral on the non-moral. There appears to be a connection between natural facts - (that X causes suffering) and moral facts (that X is wrong). But what is this connection? it cannot be a logical or semantic entailment. Somehow the moral facts are supervenient and consequential of natural facts - X is morally wrong *because* it causes suffering. But what is this connection? How can this connection be identified? Whe one sees the wrongness of an action, they are required to see the natural fact, the supervening moral facts, and the supposed connection between them. This is unecessarily complex when a simpler explanation is that there is a subjective response to certain natural facts.

### Patterns of Objectification

Because of the reasons given above, it is best to reject the common paradoxical beliefs of ordinary thoughts, so long as an explanation can be given for the moral beliefs of ordinary moral thought. The supposed objectivity of moral qualities arises from the projection or objectification of moral attitudes, as well as reversing the causal direction between what is *desired* and what is *good*. Moral attitudes are socially necessary patterns of behavior that put presse on individuals. Moral codes are needed to regulate interpersonal relations often in ways contrary to any individual's inclinations. Thus, moral judgments need to seem authoritative to others in the sense that their justification is agent-independent; objectivity is what can provide this authority. 

# Objections