Your position moves from a *descriptive* fact (concerning how the world *is*) to a *normative* value (concerning how the world *ought* to be). The descriptive fact posits that there *are* groups genetically disposed to undesirable behavior or attributes. I will be agnostic as to the truth of this fact, as I'm not really sure what you mean. The normative value posits that these groups *ought* not be given the same fundamental dignity as everyone else. This is an assumption that I take issue with. This all rests on the assumption that genetic group differences in desirable behavior undermine the fundamental dignity of all humans. 

But why make this assumption? Why is this an intuitive assumption to you? No one believes that *individual* genetic differences undermine fundamental equal human dignity. We can easily point to individuals who are genetically better than us with regard to various desirable attributes. For example, Albert Einstein was undoubtedly genetically disposed to be a better physicist than us, Michael Jordan a better basketball player, Mozart a better composer, etc. This doesn't apply just to physicists, basketball players, composers, etc. For any given important characteristic, we can find individuals who are genetically "better" than us with respect to that characteristic. Yet most people would not claim that we therefore deserve less dignity, less respect, fewer rights, etc. than these talented people. We also all have friends who are more intelligent than us, more athletic than us, etc. But we don't think that these differences in ability entail a fundamental difference in human dignity between us and our talented friends. I mean, do you think you deserve more dignity, respect, rights than your less gifted friends? I would hope not.

So we don't think that *individual* genetic differences undermine the dignity of all humans. So why believe that *group* differences do? We can even take the cases described above and apply them to groups. If you grant that, for any given important characteristics, there are individuals with "better" genetics than us with respect to those characteristics (which any sane person must grant), then there must be a *group* of those individuals - i.e. groups that have "better" genetics than us in those respects. So most ordinary, reasonable people can already identify *groups* that are genetically better than us in various respects. However, this doesn't undermine any belief in fundamental human dignity. If average genetic group differences don't undermine fundamental human dignity, then why would it matter if these differences tracked biological human subspecies (whatever that means) in some manner?

Your position is reasonable only if you conflate the descriptive sense of "equality" (everyone has equal abilities) with the normative sense of "equality" (everyone has equal dignity). But these are completely separate concepts. Equal human dignity is not committed to equal human abilities. If it were, then you should have abandoned fundamental human dignity far before you discovered the reality of biological human subspecies (whatever that means), since equal human abilities can be debunked via simple reflection and observation