## Introduction

I address questions about whether core rights affirmed by Nozick are considerably more deeply restrictive than Nozick himself anticipates. I address questions about whether those rights are so constraining that they deeply restrict their own exercise. These questions have been forcefully pressed in two important critical discussions of rights-oriented libertarian thought, Peter Railton’s “Locke, Stock, and Peril: Natural Property Rights, Pollution, and Risk” (1985) and David Sobel’s “Backing Away from Libertarian Self- Ownership” (2012).

Both of these papers maintain that “libertarian rights” or “Lockean rights” are much more restrictive than their advocates generally recognize. Libertarian rights demand that all agents desist from even the most minor unprovoked and non-consensual physical intrusions upon right-holders; in addition, these rights demand that all agents desist from imposing on others even modest risks of such intrusions. Yet, compliance with these demands requires that individuals forego almost all of the ordinary exercises of rights by which individuals maintain their lives and achieve their ends. Such stringent libertarian rights morally hog-tie their possessors. These rights systematically make their exercise morally impermissible. The complaint is that much of whatever is within one’s domain - in the sense that others may not destroy or seize or control it without one’s permission - will not be within one’s sovereign domain - in the sense that one’s chosen use of that material is morally allowed and protected.

In this chapter, I focus on what the friend of libertarian rights should say about “minor intrusions,” i.e., impositions of very low-level physical effects upon another person or her property. I take it that any sensible friend of libertarian rights will want to say that minor intrusions are morally permissible. The difficulty is to provide an explanation for this permissibility that does not render rights less morally imposing or less contra-consequentialist than libertarian rights theorists want them to be.

Railton and Sobel maintain that a natural solution involves a general shift from an understanding of claim-rights as moral claims that are protected by property rules to an understanding of claim-rights as moral claims that are protected by liability rules. If a moral boundary is protected by a property rule, others are required not to cross that boundary without the consent of the right-holder. On the other hand, if a boundary is protected by a liability rule, others may cross that boundary without the consent of the right-holder as long as due compensation is paid.

I agree that a general liability rule attenuation of rights explains the permissibility of minor intrusions in a way that undermines the robustness of the rights that the libertarian theorist endorses. Hence, the need for the friend of libertarian rights to offer an alternative explanation for the permissibility of minor intrusions. I offer an alternative “elbow room for rights” explanation for the permissibility of minor intrusions: a reasonable delineation of basic moral rights must be such that the claim-rights that are ascribed to individuals do not systematically preclude people from exercising the liberty-rights that the claim-rights are supposed to protect. The elbow room postulate tells us that, since the impermissibility of minor intrusions would be hog-tying, a reasonable delineation of rights does not construe minor intrusions as boundary-crossings. The moral elbow room postulate is not an ad hoc stipulation dreamed up solely to deal with the difficulties that Railton and Sobel explore. Rather, the postulate is well anchored in the underlying reasons for affirming Lockean rights. Moreover, the postulate can deal with a range of over-restrictiveness issues that are not considered by Railton or Sobel.

The most basic organizing principle for Lockean rights theory is the moral principle that each individual is to be allowed to live his own life in his own chosen way. Lockean rights theory needs both to provide philosophical support for this organizing principle and to articulate it in terms of the ascription to persons of an array of abstract moral rights. Each abstract moral right provides individuals with moral protection against one of the diverse ways in which they can be prevented (by others) from living their own lives in their own chosen ways. For these reasons, the right to self-ownership and he right to acquire and exercise discretional control over extra-personal objects are important aspects of the proper delineation of libertarian rights. However, agents who are not enabled to live as they choose because another party declines to supply one of his kidneys or declines to participate in desired sexual interactions are not thereby made unable—or precluded from living their own lives in their own chosen ways.

## Assessing liability rule attenuation

The construal of persons’ most fundamental moral rights as claims protected by liability rules fails to capture much of what makes those rights attractive.

Rights are about the protection of choice. Persons may be harmed in certain ways when their rights are violated and that harm may be counterbalanced by simultaneous or subsequent due compensation; but such compensation does not counterbalance the wrong that is done to the right-holder by depriving him of the choice of whether he will be subject to that counterbalanced harm. The core of a property right—indeed, at the core of any moral claim protected by a property rule—is “a right to say no to proposed terms of exchange”.

A general liability rule attenuation of rights does not comport with Nozickian invocations of moral inviolability. One salient dimension of belief in the moral inviolability of persons is subscription to principled anti-paternalism. That is, at least some interventions that aim at the recipient’s good and on balance do advance the recipient’s good are still impermissible infringements of the recipient’s rights. However, liability rule attenuation undermines principled anti-paternalism. For, given that attenuation, if an intervention bestows an over-balancing good on its recipient, there will be no infringement of rights.

Two extreme examples: 
1. Forced participation in organ redistribution pools. All members of the pool start with two healthy organs. If a member loses both organs, some other member of the pool is required to donate an organ for that first member. The expected loss from being a member is less than the expected gain. So, the pool is one that rational individual cost-benefit calculators would freely enter. Liability rule attenuation seems to allow forcing people into such pools on the simple grounds that the (expected) cost of participation is more than duly compensated for by the (expected) gain.
2. Consider compensation that is not direct/intended. Imagine a group of people are captured by slave raiders and held in slavery for the rest of their lives. However, had they not been captured, an unforseen disaster would have killed them. Under liability rule attenuation of rights, no rights would have been violated.

## Epstein on implicit in-kind compensation

I explore the explanation for the permissibility of minor intrusions advocated by the Locke-leaning legal theorist Richard Epstein. Epstein’s scheme allows minor intrusions on individuals on the basis of those individuals being implicitly compensated in-kind by being allowed themselves to engage in minor intrusions on others.

According to Epstein (2009, p. 16), “To head off those results [of barbecuing, talking, or farming being prohibited], a strong live-and-let live principle allows all low-level nuisances to continue without [explicit] compensation, and this creates universal Pareto improvements that should be welcomed on all sides.”

Epstein’s stance does not quite amount to a liability rule attenuation of rights. Epstein holds that there are very substantial “utilitarian” gains associated with allowing minor intrusions; yet, he holds these gains do not themselves vindicate (even) minor intrusions. Epstein believes that the wrongfulness of subjecting an individual to such intrusions is sufficiently tempered by that individual’s enjoyment of in-kind compensation; i.e., compensation in the form of that individual’s own opportunity to engage in minor intrusions. Presumably more extensive intrusions are also to be allowed if those subject to them receive the due in-kind or out-of-kind compensation as that would be required under a general liability rule attenuation of rights.

Difference between elbow room reasoning and implicit in-kind compensation: under implicit in-kind compensation, in order for A to have the right to impose minor constraints on B, B must benefit from having similar rights. Thus, if B had no use of such rights (i.e. he had no need to impose comparable minor constraints on others), then A has no right to impose minor constraints on B. Under elbow room reasoning, in order for A to have the right to impose minor constraints on B, this imposition must merely be necessary for A to exercise his liberties, independently of whether B benefits from having similar rights.

## Elbow Room Reasoning

I expand on my claims that elbow room delineation of rights is well rooted within Lockean natural rights theory
and I explain why elbow room reasoning is not, contrary to appearances, aspecies of implicit in-kind compensation reasoning.

In order for people to possess the moral liberty to do as they see fit with their persons and property, they must have claim-rights (to supplement their liberty-rights) over themselves and their property. These claim-rights require others to leave them in discretionary control of themselves and their rightful holdings.

At the same time, the lesson to be drawn from the hog-tying challenge is that, in order for people to possess the moral liberty to do as they see fit with their own persons and property, they must not be morally precluded from engaging in minor intrusions that are integral to their discretionary control over and disposition of their own persons and property.

The elbow room postulate plays a systematic role within rights theory by guiding the reasonable delineation of rights. Two examples:

1. Moral elbow room reasoning is used in (a) arguing against joint-onwership theory of property and (b) for the Lockean proviso that Locke provides: 
	a. If the earth were originally the joint property of all of mankind, any permissible individual use of any portion of the earth would require a compact among all the joint-owners that is impossible. But if the earth were the joint property of all, then there would be no room for individuals to exercise their most fundamental natural right, viz., “the right everyone had to take care of, and provide for their Subsistence” (Locke 1689, First Treatise, §87). For any exercise of this fundamental right requires that individuals be at liberty to make use of portions of the earth.
	b. Locke's argument against a delineation of private property rights that on net diminishes the opportunity of individuals “to take care of, and provide for their Subsistence” (1689, First Treatise, §87). This is why we have claim-rights that constrain the behavior of others such that their acquisition of private property on net leave "enough, and as good" (1689, Second Treatise, §27) for the use of that individual.

2. Moral elbow room reasoning is used to support the right of self-defense. Why is the use of harmful force against another agent morally permissible when it is employed in order to block that other agent from violating one’s rights? Why doesn’t the attacker’s right of self-ownership morally preclude the defender from striking the attacker in order to ward off the attack? One response goes from the prospective victim’s self-ownership to her possession of a moral liberty to defend herself against violations of that right, and from that moral liberty to harm-inflicting defensive acts not being boundary-crossings. This is possible only if agents do not have rights against being subject to such defensive acts.
	- The elbow room account avoids reliance upon the idea that the attacker forfeits in part or in whole an original blanket right against being subjected to any harmful force. This avoidance is a good thing if one holds—as one should—that self-defensive force may be used against blameless attackers. For forfeiture can do no real work in explaining the permissibility of those self-defensive acts.

In these cases, as in the elbow room argument for minor intrusions not counting as boundary- crossings, I have moved from individuals possessing moral liberties to act in certain ways to there being no boundaries that stand as moral barriers to these actions. 

Why not instead appeal to liability rule?
- Liability does not explain the case of self-defense. The defender does not infringe upon any right of the attacker that requires compensation on the part of the defender.
- Liability rule does not explain the argument against joint-onwership. It seems that the moral liberty of preserving oneself is not itself something one has to pay for. Thus, we shouldn't have to pay others for unilaterally acquiring our fair share of resources. This conclusions conflicts with a joint onwership theory of property protected by liability rules.
- Generally speaking, when the intrusions are minor enough, it doesn't seem we need to compensate such intrusions when they are necessary to exercise our liberties. This is true, even when the coercee doesn't invoke similar intrusons on other (i.e. they are a ne negative from the existence of these intrusions).

Liability might be relevant in the following circumstances:
- Soft paternalism - A can coece B to save him if it is true that B would want to be coerced if he were aware of the relevant facts. E.g. A pushes B out of the way of a truck that B is unaware of.
- Scarce resources - imagine a single pool of gas that lies below A and B's plot of land. Neither can extract without limiting the rights of the other. Thus, the proper strategy might be to allow unilateral consumption from both with forced compensation to the other.

It suffices to solve the hog-tying problem that *non-malicious* minor intrusions be permissible. We can reasonably view minor intrusions fundamental exercises of one's rights when they are incidental to the agent’s decisions about how to deploy his person or property. However, if those intrusions malicious - e.g. done for the sake of being intrusive - they are instances of the agent doing as he wants with others or their property and, hence, as boundary-crossing.